Situation at a glance
The World Health Organization (WHO) was notified about a case of human infection with an influenza A(H9N2) virus in Viet Nam on 9 April 2024 by the International Health Regulations (IHR) National Focal Point (NFP). The patient, who had underlying conditions and was in severe condition was admitted to the intensive care on 21 March 2024. A respiratory sample was collected on 21 March and tested positive for influenza by Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR). Subsequently, virus subtyping confirmed avian influenza A(H9N2) on 8 April. Case investigation identified that the case lives near a poultry market, where poultry trade occurs daily in front of his house. As of 15 April, there have been no reports of new cases with respiratory symptoms among contacts of the case or outbreaks in the community where the case resides. This is the first human infection with an avian influenza A(H9N2) virus reported in Viet Nam. According to the IHR (2005), a human infection caused by a novel influenza A virus subtype is an event that has the potential for high public health impact and must be notified to the WHO. Based on available information, WHO assesses the risk to the general population posed by this virus as low.
Description of the situation
On 9 April 2024, the IHR NFP of Viet Nam notified WHO of one human infection with an avian influenza A(H9N2) virus.

The patient is a 37-year-old male from Tien Giang Province, Viet Nam, who had underlying conditions. The patient developed a fever on 10 March 2024 and was admitted to the hospital on 16 March. Following a diagnosis of severe pneumonia with bilateral pleural effusions, he was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) on 21 March and received treatment with oseltamivir and antibiotics. As of 15 April, the patient was still in severe condition and under intensive care.

The patient was detected through severe viral pneumonia surveillance (SVP). A nasopharyngeal swab was collected on 21 March, and the test result revealed positive avian influenza A with similar H9-strain gene segments on 22 March. On 1 April, Pasteur Institute in Ho Chi Minh City (PI HCMC) performed PCR testing, which confirmed the presence of avian influenza A(H9) virus. Subsequently, virus subtyping confirmed avian influenza A(H9N2) on 8 April.

Case investigation identified that the patient lives near a poultry market, where poultry trade occurs daily in front of his house. There have been no reports of dead or sick poultry near the patient’s residence or of consumption of sick, dead, or uncooked poultry products from his household or neighbouring households. However, influenza A(H9N2) is not highly pathogenic in poultry. On 2 April, seven poultry samples were collected from two live bird trading points within the same commune. One sample was positive A(H5N1); the remaining were negative for avian influenza A(H5N1), A(H5N6), A(H5N8), A(H7N9), and A(H9). On 4 April, samples were taken from two geese at the patient's house, which tested negative for A(H5) and A(H9).

Fifteen close contacts of the case have been requested to self-monitor their health at home. As of 15 April, there have been no reports of new cases with respiratory symptoms among contacts of the case or outbreaks in the community where the case resides.

This is the first human infection with avian influenza A(H9N2) reported in Viet Nam. 

Epidemiology
Influenza viruses natural reservoir is wild water birds, but some influenza viruses may infect poultry and mammals, including humans. Infections in humans have primarily been acquired through direct contact with infected animals or contaminated environments. Avian influenza virus infections in humans may cause diseases ranging from mild upper respiratory tract infection to more severe diseases and can be fatal. Conjunctivitis, gastrointestinal symptoms, encephalitis and encephalopathy have also been reported.

Laboratory tests are required to diagnose human infection with influenza. WHO periodically updates technical guidance protocols for the detection of zoonotic influenza using molecular methods, e.g. RT-PCR. Evidence suggests that some antiviral drugs, notably neuraminidase inhibitors (oseltamivir, zanamivir), can reduce the duration of viral replication and improve prognosis in some cases.

To date, globally there have been 99 cases of human avian influenza A(H9N2) infections, including two deaths, reported to WHO since 2015.

Public health response
The government of Viet Nam has taken the following public health response actions:

PI HCMC and Ho Chi Minh City Center for Disease Control (HCDC), in cooperation with the Tien Giang Provincial CDC, have conducted investigations, contact tracing, and disinfection of the patient’s residence and suspected exposure areas.
Local public health and animal health sectors cooperated for further investigation, contact tracing and testing for possible detection of potential additional cases and/or outbreaks of avian influenza A(H9N2) or other strains in humans and poultry.
On 5 April, the Ministry of Health issued a press release containing detailed information about the case and provided public health messages on proactive disease prevention and control measures.
WHO risk assessment
Most human cases of infection with avian influenza A(H9N2) viruses are exposed to the virus through contact with infected poultry or contaminated environments. Human infection tends to result in mild clinical illness. Further human cases can be expected since the virus continues to be detected in poultry populations. No clusters of cases have been reported.

Currently available epidemiological and virological evidence suggests that this virus has not acquired the ability to be sustained in transmission among humans. Thus, the likelihood of human-to-human spread is low. Should infected individuals from affected areas travel internationally, their infection may be detected in another country during travel or after arrival. If this were to occur, further community-level spread is considered unlikely as this virus has not acquired the ability to transmit easily among humans.

WHO advice
This case does not change the current WHO recommendations on public health measures and influenza surveillance. A thorough investigation of every human infection is essential.

The public should avoid contact with high-risk environments such as live animal markets/farms and live poultry or surfaces that might be contaminated by poultry droppings. Hand hygiene, with frequent washing or the use of alcohol hand sanitizer, is recommended. WHO does not recommend any specific different measures for travelers.

All human infections caused by a new subtype of influenza virus are notifiable under the IHR (2005). State Parties to the IHR (2005) are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a recent human infection caused by an influenza A virus with the potential to cause a pandemic.

WHO advises against applying any travel or trade restrictions based on the current information available on this event.

Situation at a glance
The Timor-Leste government reported to the World Health Organization on 22 March 2024, its first confirmed fatal human case of rabies. The country is currently classified as rabies-free. The case, from Pasabe Sub-Region, Oecusse, with a history of dog bite on 26 December 2023, went to a local health center on 20 March and died on 22 March 2024. As of 26 March, a total of 29 suspected rabies cases in humans, with exposure to dogs, were reported in Oecusse Municipality this year. The public health response is ongoing and includes vaccination of dogs, risk communication, training of healthcare workers on case management, active surveillance, and ensuring the availability of rabies vaccines and human rabies immunoglobulin. Based on the current available information, the WHO assesses the risk posed by this event as high at the national level and low at regional and global levels.
Description of the situation
On 22 March 2024, the Timor-Leste Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Agriculture, Fishery and Forestry, reported to the World Health Organization (WHO) its first confirmed fatal human case of rabies. The case is a 19-year-old female from Pasabe Sub-Region, Oecusse, formally known as the Special Administrative Region of Oe-Cússe Ambeno (RAEOA - Portuguese acronym). The case was confirmed by Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCT) at the National Health Laboratory in Timor-Leste on 22 March from a saliva sample taken prior to the individual’s death.

On 20 March, the patient presented to a local health center with symptoms including high fever, vomiting, sore throat, cough, difficulty swallowing food, hydrophobia, photophobia, back pain, and neck stiffness. It was reported that she was bitten on the hands by a dog on 26 December 2023 in Oecusse. During the investigation, residents described the dog as very aggressive, and reported that it had not bitten anyone else. The dog died and was buried on 27 December 2023. The patient had not received rabies post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) after the dog bite. On 21 March, she was transferred to Guido Valadares National Hospital (HNGV) in the capital city of Dili and died on 22 March 2024.

During 2024, as of 26 March, a total of 29 suspected rabies cases exposed to dogs in Oecusse Municipality, RAEOA, were reported. All suspected cases have been administered the Tetanus Toxoid (TT) and Rabies PEP vaccines. However, the Rabies Immune Globulin (RIG) serum could not be provided because it was out of stock.

It should be noted that Oecusse is an enclave of Timor-Leste located within Indonesia East Nusa Tenggara province (NTT) where between 1 January and 15 March 2024, six human rabies deaths have been recorded. In 2023, a total of 30 human rabies deaths were reported from NTT province.

Epidemiology
Rabies is a vaccine-preventable, zoonotic, viral disease affecting the central nervous system. Once clinical symptoms appear, rabies is nearly 100% fatal. In up to 99% of cases, domestic dogs are responsible for rabies virus transmission to humans. Yet rabies can affect both domestic and wild animals. It spreads to people and animals via saliva, usually through bites, scratches or direct contact with mucosa (e.g. eyes, mouth or open wounds). Children between the ages of 5 and 14 years are frequent victims. Direct human-to-human transmission has never been documented, however it has occurred from infected organ/tissue donors to transplant recipients.

The incubation period for rabies is typically 2–3 months but may vary from 1 week to 1 year, depending on factors such as the location of virus entry and the viral load. Initial symptoms of rabies include generic signs like fever, pain and unusual or unexplained tingling, pricking, or burning sensations at the wound site. As the virus moves to the central nervous system, progressive and fatal inflammation of the brain and spinal cord develops. Clinical rabies in people can be managed but very rarely cured, and not without severe neurological deficits. Rabies deaths occur mainly in those who cannot immediately access effective post-exposure prophylaxis. According to the Union Against Rabies Forum (launched by FAO, WHO and WOAH), globally, every nine minutes one person dies from rabies. Almost half of them are children.

People can be protected against rabies through a vaccine given to individuals as pre-exposure or post-exposure prophylaxis. Post-exposure prophylaxis is the emergency response to a rabies exposure. This prevents the virus from entering the central nervous system, which would invariably result in death.

Public health response
The Timor-Leste Ministry of Health has taken the following public health response actions:

Dog vaccination has been conducted in the Municipalities of Covalima, Bobonaro, and RAEOA, achieving a coverage rate of 70% as of 25 March 2024. Dog vaccination is ongoing with a target to achieve 100% coverage.
Risk communication to raise community awareness via social media, community campaign and press conference, advising citizens residing in the border area to vaccinate their dogs, avoid contact with wild animals, observe if there are any changes in dog behavior, report dog bite incidents for immediate treatment and rabies vaccination.
Providing training to healthcare workers in all health care facilities on investigation and clinical management of suspected rabies exposures.
Implementing active surveillance, with all dog bite cases now required to be reported to the Community Health Centers (CHCs) with necessary information recorded and provided with appropriate case management.
Ensuring availability of rabies vaccines and human rabies immunoglobulin (HRIG) in all CHCs and regional referral hospitals.
Organising Rabies Tripartite Expert Mission to Timor-Leste with Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), WHO and World Organization for Animal Health (WOAH).
WHO procured 1000 doses of human rabies vaccines and distributed them to hospitals and health clinics. Collaboration between the Timor-Leste Ministry of Health and WHO is ongoing to provide additional anti-rabies vaccines and RIG to individuals who have been exposed to a suspected rabid animal.

WHO risk assessment
The risk at the national level is assessed as ‘High’ due to the following:

The country was previously classified as “rabies free” and has now reported the first confirmed human case. As such, experience and awareness of community and health care workers on rabies are likely limited.
Oecusse, the municipality where the current case was bitten and reported from, is an enclave of Timor-Leste located within East Nusa Tenggara province (NTT) in Indonesia where rabies is endemic in both dogs and humans.
Current dog vaccination coverage in NTT province, Indonesia is only 5.5% and dog vaccine coverage in Indonesia in 2022, was 24%, while 70% coverage is needed as the main technical control measure.
Timor-Leste has a significant population of stray and unvaccinated dogs including in the areas bordering Indonesia.
Insufficient stock of human rabies vaccines in the government health facilities.
The health workers have limited knowledge about rabies case management, dog bite and scratch case management.
Inadequate veterinary services, including the lack of regular canine vaccination campaigns against rabies, a lack of stock of canine rabies vaccines and inadequate laboratory capacity for rabies testing
Not all humans bitten by a suspected rabid animal (mainly dogs) receive adequate and timely PEP, due to several reasons including lack of awareness among the general population and health workers, and lack of vaccination and RIG.
NTT province in Indonesia shares land borders with Timor-Leste, and control measures to limit the movement of animals, particularly unvaccinated dogs, across these borders is challenging due to the terrain and extent of the land border.
Since Timor-Leste's only land border is with NTT province in Indonesia, which is already endemic for rabies (humans and canines), the risk of the international spread of rabies from Timor-Leste to other countries is unlikely. Available data indicates only the current one fatal case of rabies in Timor-Leste, with no links to international travel, tourism or international gatherings.

WHO advice
Although highly effective animal vaccines have been available for over a century, rabies remains present on all continents except Antarctica. Rabies is included in WHO’s 2021–2030 Roadmap for the Global Control of Neglected Tropical Diseases, which sets regional, progressive targets for the elimination of targeted diseases. Rabies elimination is feasible and achievable if this goal is prioritized and financially and politically supported. The key to implementing effective rabies elimination programs is to engage with local communities, start small, catalyze long-term investment through stimulus packages, ensure the ownership of governments, demonstrate success and cost-effectiveness, and scale up quickly.

As a zoonotic disease, rabies requires close cross-sectoral coordination at the national, regional and global levels, including:

Risk Communication and Community Engagement (RCCE): Raising awareness of rabies disease through engaging communities and empowering people to seek early treatment whenever they are exposed to a rabid animal. This includes an understanding of how to prevent rabies in animals, when to suspect rabies, and what to do in case of exposure.
Immunization of persons: Very effective rabies vaccines and rabies immunoglobulins are available to immunize people after suspected exposure to rabies (post-exposure prophylaxis). Appropriate wound management and prompt access to quality-assured PEP are almost 100% effective in preventing human rabies deaths. Pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) is recommended for people in certain high-risk occupations (such as laboratory workers handling live rabies and rabies-related viruses) and people whose professional or personal activities might lead to direct contact with bats or other mammals that may be infected with rabies (such as animal disease control staff and wildlife rangers). PrEP might also be indicated for outdoor travellers and people living in remote, highly rabies-endemic areas with limited local access to rabies biologics.
Mass dog vaccination: As dogs transmit up to 99% of human rabies cases, the control and elimination of rabies in dogs prevents rabies at its source. Vaccinating dogs, including puppies, is the most cost-effective strategy for preventing rabies in people, and reduces the need for PEP. Mass dog vaccination with high quality and safe vaccines, aiming at 70% coverage in endemic areas interrupts Rabies virus (RABV) transmission at its animal source and saves human lives. Education on dog behaviour and bite prevention for both children and adults is an essential extension of rabies vaccination programs and can decrease both the incidence of human rabies and the financial burden of treating dog bites.
Wildlife vaccination: Oral rabies vaccination for use in wildlife is available with efficacy claims for several wildlife species, such as foxes, raccoon dogs, wolves, coyotes and raccoons.
This event does not interfere with travel and trade. Travellers must be made aware of the risk of contracting rabies while traveling to rabies-endemic countries.

Situation at a glance
The World Health Organization (WHO) was notified about a laboratory-confirmed case of human infection with an influenza A(H5N1) virus on 1 April 2024 by the United States of America IHR National Focal Point (NFP). The patient developed symptoms on 27 March and had a history of exposure to dairy cattle (cows) presumed to be infected with influenza A (H5N1) virus. This is the second confirmed human case of influenza A(H5N1) detected in the country. It also appears to be the first human infection with A(H5N1) acquired from contact with an infected mammal, although human infections with other influenza subtypes have previously been acquired from mammals. No additional associated cases of human infection with influenza A(H5N1) have been identified. Since the virus has not acquired mutations that facilitate transmission among humans and based on available information, WHO assesses the public health risk to the general population posed by this virus to be low and for occupationally exposed persons, the risk of infection is considered low-to-moderate.
Description of the situation
On 1 April 2024, the IHR NFP of the United States of America notified WHO of a laboratory-confirmed human case of avian influenza A(H5N1) detected in the state of Texas.

The case is aged over 18 years. On 27 March, the case developed conjunctivitis, was reported to be while working at a commercial dairy cattle farm and had a history of exposure to dairy cattle (cows) presumed to be infected with influenza A(H5N1) virus (1).  

On 28 March, respiratory and conjunctival specimens were collected from the case and tested at the Texas Tech University Bioterrorism Response Laboratory. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis indicated that both specimens were presumptive positive for influenza A(H5) virus. The specimens were then sent to the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (US CDC) for further testing. They were received and tested at the US CDC on 30 March and confirmed as high pathogenicity avian influenza (HPAI) A(H5N1) virus clade 2.3.4.4b by RT-PCR and sequencing (1) (2). Genome sequencing of the virus didn’t show new mutations possibly associated with increased transmission to humans.

On 28 March, the patient was advised to isolate and given antiviral treatment (oseltamivir) following US CDC guidance. The patient did not report symptoms other than conjunctivitis, was not hospitalized, and at the time of reporting, was recovering (1).  

Household contacts of the patient have not reported illness and have been provided influenza antiviral prophylaxis as per US CDC recommendations.  No additional cases of human infection with influenza A(H5N1) associated with this case have been identified (1). 

In the United States, since January 2022, detections of HPAI A(H5N1) virus among wild birds have been reported in 50 states or territories. There have been reports of sporadic A-(H5) virus outbreaks among poultry and backyard flocks as well as sporadic detections in mammals and outdoor cats on the dairy facilities as reported by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Animal Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS).

Influenza A virus infection is exceptionally rare in bovine species (3). This human case had exposure to dairy cattle in Texas, presumed to be infected with HPAI A(H5N1) virus (4)(5). On 25 March, the USDA reported the first detection of HPAI A(H5N1) virus in dairy cattle and unpasteurized milk samples from cattle in Texas and Kansas in four dairy herds. On 29 March, USDA announced confirmation of additional detections in dairy cattle in Michigan dairy cattle that recently received cows from Texas. USDA has also announced additional confirmed detections in dairy cattle in Idaho, New Mexico, and Ohio. To date, USDA has announced confirmed detections on 15 farms across six states: Idaho (n=1), Kansas (n=3), Michigan (n=1), New Mexico (n=2), Ohio (n=1), and Texas (n=7) (5,6,7). USDA is continuing to monitor and test samples collected from other farms where cattle are displaying decreased lactation, low appetite, and other signs (1,5,6,7).

The USDA has publicly posted the genetic sequences of several recently detected HPAI A(H5N1) viruses found in US wild birds, poultry, wild mammals and cattle in Texas (8). The viruses are from clade 2.3.4.4b, which is the most common HPAI A(H5N1) virus circulating among birds worldwide currently.  CDC has publicly posted the genome of the virus identified from the patient in Texas and identified only minor changes when compared to the animal viruses (2).  Between 9 February 2022 to 29 March 2024, more than 8000 people were actively monitored in the United States following exposure to animals presumed to be infected with HPAI A(H5N1) viruses.

Epidemiology
Animal influenza A viruses normally circulate in animals but can also infect humans. Infections in humans have primarily been acquired through direct contact with infected animals or contaminated environments. Depending on the original host, influenza A viruses can be classified as avian influenza, swine influenza, or other types of animal influenza viruses.

Avian influenza virus infections in humans may cause diseases ranging from mild upper respiratory tract infection to more severe diseases and can be fatal. Conjunctivitis, gastrointestinal symptoms, encephalitis and encephalopathy have also been reported in previous human infections with A (H5N1) viruses. There have also been a few detections of A(H5N1) virus in asymptomatic persons who had exposure to infected birds.

Laboratory tests are required to diagnose human infection with influenza. WHO periodically updates technical guidance protocols for the detection of zoonotic influenza using molecular methods, e.g. RT-PCR. Evidence suggests that some antiviral drugs, notably neuraminidase inhibitors (oseltamivir, zanamivir), can reduce the duration of viral replication and improve prospects of survival in some cases.

Avian influenza A(H5N1) virus belonging to Gs/GD lineage, clade 2.3.4.4b Eurasian-origin infections have been reported in birds in the United States since 2022. In late March 2024, HPAI A(H5N1) was also detected in dairy herds in Texas and Kansas (4,5).  

This is the first human infection caused by avian influenza A(H5N1) virus in 2024 in the United States and the second confirmed detection in human in the country. This also appears to be the first human infection with A(H5N1) acquired from contact with an infected mammal although human infections with other influenza subtypes have been acquired from mammals. The first detection of influenza A(H5N1) in human in the United States was identified in April 2022, in a person involved in culling birds at a commercial poultry facility in Colorado (9). 

In the past, small clusters of A(H5) virus infections were reported, including some involving health care workers, where limited human-to-human transmission could not be excluded; however, sustained human-to-human transmission has not been detected. In this event, the case had direct contact with cows presumed to be infected with A(H5N1) viruses and no further human cases have been detected associated with this event.

Public health response
Local and national health authorities implemented the following public health measures (1,10):

Public health officials are conducting surveillance activities in Texas in response to this detection.
US CDC is working with state health departments to monitor workers who may have been in contact with infected or potentially infected birds/animals and test those people who develop symptoms.
US CDC has issued recommendations for the public regarding avoiding unprotected contact with sick or dead animals, including wild birds, poultry, other domestic fowl, and other wild or domestic animals, as well as animal droppings, litter, or materials contaminated by birds or other animals with suspected or confirmed HPAI A (H5N1) virus infection.
US CDC has issues recommendations to avoid consumption of raw or undercooked food or related uncooked food products, such as unpasteurized (raw) milk or raw cheese, from animals with suspected or confirmed infection with HPAI A(H5N1) virus. 
The United States has a robust surveillance system that is designed to mitigate the spread of animal diseases, thereby protecting public health, and maintaining a safe food supply for domestic and international markets. The U.S. surveillance system includes a national network of border protection personnel at ports of entry (1).

WHO risk assessment
This human case was reportedly exposed to dairy cattle in Texas, where HPAI A (H5N1) has recently been confirmed in dairy herds.

From 2003 to 1 April 2024, a total of 889 cases and 463 deaths (CFR 52%) caused by influenza A(H5N1) virus have been reported worldwide from 23 countries. The most recently reported case in humans prior to the current case, was in March 2024 in Viet Nam (11). The human case in Texas is the fourth reported in the region of the Americas, the most recent prior case having been reported in Chile in March 2023 (12).

Whenever avian influenza viruses are circulating in birds, there is a risk for sporadic infections in mammals and humans due to exposure to infected animals (including livestock), or contaminated environments and thus, further human cases are not unexpected.  Influenza A infection has been rarely reported in bovine species and spread among dairy cattle herds in four U.S. States is being assessed. Previously, there have been human infections with other avian influenza subtypes following exposure to infected mammals.

Since the virus has not acquired mutations that facilitate transmission among humans and based on available information, WHO assesses the public health risk to the general population posed by this virus to be low and for occupationally exposed persons the risk of infection is considered low-to-moderate.

There are no specific vaccines for preventing influenza A(H5N1) virus infection in humans. Candidate vaccines to prevent H5 infection in humans have been developed for pandemic preparedness purposes. Close analysis of the epidemiological situation, further characterization of the most recent viruses (from human cases and animal) and comprehensive investigations around human cases are critical to assess associated risk and to adjust risk management measures in a timely manner. 

If needed, the risk assessment will be reviewed should further epidemiological or virological information become available.

WHO advice
This case does not change the current WHO recommendations on public health measures and surveillance of influenza. Establishing and monitoring the extent of influenza A(H5N1) virus in dairy herds in the affected localities of the country should inform changes in the ongoing risk assessment.

Due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect and monitor virological, epidemiological and clinical changes associated with emerging or circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal) health and timely virus sharing for risk assessment. 

When there has been human exposure to a known outbreak of an influenza A virus in or when there has been an identified human case of infection with such a virus, enhanced surveillance in potentially exposed human populations becomes necessary. Enhanced surveillance should consider the health care seeking behaviour of the population, and could include a range of active and passive health care and/or community-based approaches, including: enhanced surveillance in local influenza-like illness (ILI)/severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) systems, active screening in hospitals and of groups that may be at higher occupational risk of exposure, and inclusion of other sources such as traditional healers, private practitioners and private diagnostic laboratories.

In the case of a confirmed or suspected human infection caused by a novel influenza A virus with pandemic potential, including avian influenza virus, a thorough epidemiologic investigation (even while awaiting the confirmatory laboratory results) of history of exposure to animals, of travel, and contact tracing should be conducted. The epidemiologic investigation should include early identification of unusual events that could signal person-to-person transmission of the novel virus and clinical samples collected from the time and place that the case occurred should be tested and sent to a WHO Collaboration Center for further characterization. 

Travelers to countries with known outbreaks of animal influenza should avoid farms, contact with animals in live animal markets, entering areas where animals may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with animal feces. Travelers should also wash their hands often with soap and water. Travelers should follow good food safety and good food hygiene practices. Should infected individuals from affected areas travel internationally, their infection may be detected in another country during travel or after arrival. If this were to occur, further community-level spread is considered unlikely as this virus has not acquired the ability to transmit easily among humans. 

All human infections caused by a novel influenza A virus subtype are notifiable under the International Health Regulations (IHR) and State Parties to the IHR (2005) are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a recent human infection caused by an influenza A virus with the potential to cause a pandemic. Evidence of illness is not required for this report. 

WHO does not advise special traveler screening at points of entry or restrictions regarding the current situation of influenza viruses at the human-animal interface. 

Situation at a glance
The World Health Organization (WHO) was notified about a case of human infection with an influenza A(H5N1) virus on 25 March 2024 by the national authorities of Viet Nam. The patient, who had no underlying medical conditions, developed symptoms on 11 March and died on 23 March. Exposure to birds was ascertained to have taken place in the third week of February. Samples collected from close contacts tested negative for influenza A(H5N1) virus. This is the first human infection with an avian influenza A (H5N1) virus reported in Viet Nam since 2022. According to the International Health Regulations (IHR) 2005, a human infection caused by a novel influenza A virus subtype is an event that has the potential for high public health impact and must be notified to the WHO. Based on available information, WHO assesses the risk to the general population posed by this virus as low.
Description of the situation
On 25 March 2024, Viet Nam National Focal Point (NFP) for International Health Regulations (IHR) notified the World Health Organization (WHO) of one case of human infection with an influenza A(H5N1) virus in a 21-year-old male with no underlying conditions from Khanh Hoa Province, Viet Nam.

The case developed a fever and cough on 11 March 2024 and was admitted on 15 March to a local hospital due to persistent symptoms, including abdominal pain and diarrhoea. On 17 March, his condition worsened, and he was transferred to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) of a provincial hospital. On 20 March, the patient was transferred to another provincial hospital with a diagnosis of severe pneumonia, severe sepsis, and acute respiratory distress syndrome. The case died on 23 March.

On 19 March, samples were taken for real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) testing by the Pasteur Institut in Nha Trang, which resulted in a positive result for the influenza (H5) virus. On 22 March, genomic sequencing conducted by the Pasteur Institut of Nha Trang revealed the presence of the avian influenza A (H5N1) virus.

Initial results from the case investigation revealed that during the second and third weeks of February 2024, the case went bird hunting. Between that time and the onset of illness, no contact with dead or sick poultry nor contact with anyone exhibiting similar symptoms was reported. Among close contacts traced, no further cases of influenza A(H5N1) were detected.

Epidemiology
Animal influenza viruses normally circulate in animals but can also infect humans. Infections in humans have primarily been acquired through direct contact with infected animals or contaminated environments. Depending on the original host, influenza A viruses can be classified as avian influenza, swine influenza, or other types of animal influenza viruses.

Avian influenza virus infections in humans may cause diseases ranging from mild upper respiratory tract infection to more severe diseases and can be fatal. Conjunctivitis, gastrointestinal symptoms, encephalitis and encephalopathy have also been reported. There have also been several detections of A(H5N1) virus in asymptomatic persons who had exposure to infected birds in the days before a sample was collected.

Laboratory tests are required to diagnose human infection with influenza. WHO periodically updates technical guidance protocols for the detection of zoonotic influenza using molecular methods, e.g. RT-PCR. Evidence suggests that some antiviral drugs, notably neuraminidase inhibitors (oseltamivir, zanamivir), can reduce the duration of viral replication and improve prospects of survival in some cases.

From 2003 to 25 March 2024, a total of 888 worldwide human cases of infection of influenza A(H5N1), including 463 deaths, have been reported to WHO from 23 countries. Almost all cases of human infection with avian influenza A(H5N1) have been linked to close contact with infected live or dead birds, or contaminated environments.

Since 2003, 129 human infections with influenza A (H5N1), including 65 deaths, have been reported in Viet Nam. The most recent avian influenza A (H5) case was reported in October 2022 from Northern Province of Phu Tho, Viet Nam.

Public health response
The Government of Viet Nam has taken the following public health response actions:

Conducting epidemiolocal investigation, and disinfection of the patient’s residence and suspected exposure areas.
Contact tracing, isolation, testing and monitoring for close contacts of the patient.
Testing of samples from chickens and ornamental birds near the patient’s residence. All samples collected from these birds have tested negative for influenza A(H5) viruses.
Issuing an official letter requesting the Provincial Department of Health of Khanh Hoa province to prepare drugs (Oseltamivir), and other supplies, to timely support the local hospitals and authorities in patient management and containment of potential outbreaks.
WHO risk assessment
This is the first human infection with an avian influenza A (H5N1) virus reported in Viet Nam in 2024, and since 2022.

Most human cases of infection with avian influenza viruses reported to date have been due to exposure to infected poultry or contaminated environments.

Human infection can cause severe disease and has a high mortality rate. These A(H5N1) influenza viruses, belonging to different genetic groups, do not easily infect humans, and human-to-human transmission thus far appears unusual. As the virus continues to circulate in poultry, particularly in rural areas of Viet Nam, the potential for further sporadic human cases remains.

Currently, available epidemiological and virological evidence suggests that A(H5) viruses have not acquired the ability of sustained transmission among humans; thus, the likelihood of human-to-human spread is low.

Based on available information, WHO assesses the risk to the general population posed by this virus as low. The risk assessment will be reviewed if additional virological and epidemiological information becomes available.

WHO advice
This event does not change the current WHO recommendations on public health measures and influenza surveillance.

The public should avoid contact with high-risk environments such as live animal markets/farms and live poultry, or surfaces that might be contaminated by poultry dropping. Additionally, it is recommended to maintain good hand hygiene with frequent washing or the use of alcohol- based hand sanitizer.

The general public and at-risk individuals should immediately report instances of sick or unexpected animal deaths to veterinary authorities. Consumption of sick or unexpectedly dead poultry should be avoided. 

Any person who has had exposure to potentially infected birds or contaminated environments and feels unwell should seek health care promptly and inform their healthcare provider of their possible exposure.

Close analysis of the epidemiological situation, further characterization of the most recent influenza A(H5N1) viruses in both human and poultry populations, and serological investigations are critical to assessing associated risks to public health and promptly adjusting risk management measures.

There are no specific vaccines for influenza A(H5N1) in humans. However, candidate vaccines have been developed for pandemic preparedness in some countries. The WHO continues to update the list of zoonotic influenza candidate vaccine viruses (CVV), which are selected twice a year at the WHO consultation on influenza virus vaccine composition.

WHO advises against implementing travel or trade restrictions based on the current information available on this event. WHO does not advise special traveler screening at points of entry or other restrictions due to the current situation of influenza viruses at the human-animal interface.

State Parties to the International Health Regulations (2005) are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a recent human infection caused by a new subtype of influenza virus. Evidence of illness is not required for this notification.

Situation at a glance
Since the beginning of 2023, and as of 25 February 2024, a total of 13 countries in the WHO African Region have documented probable and confirmed cases of yellow fever (YF), namely Burkina Faso, Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Chad, Republic of the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), Guinea, Niger, Nigeria, South Sudan, Togo and Uganda. Preliminary data for 2023 indicate a case fatality rate (CFR) of 11%. While the overall risk at the regional level was re-assessed as moderate and the global risk remains low, active surveillance is required due to the potential for onward transmission through travel and the presence of the competent vector in neighboring regions. The urban proliferation of Aedes spp. mosquitoes, which bite during the day, can also significantly amplify transmission risks, particularly in densely populated areas, leading to swift outbreaks. The WHO-led global Eliminate Yellow Fever Epidemics (EYE) secretariat coordinated preventive and reactive efforts and notably during 2023, substantially enhanced vaccination coverage. Approximately 62 million people have been vaccinated in Africa through preventive and reactive mass vaccination campaigns. Additionally, under catch-up campaigns in Sudan, approximately 4 million individuals received vaccination against YF.
Description of the situation
Since the beginning of 2023, and as of 25 February 2024, a total of 13 countries in the WHO African Region have documented probable and confirmed cases of yellow fever (YF), namely Burkina Faso, Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Chad, Republic of the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), Guinea, Niger, Nigeria, South Sudan, Togo and Uganda.

Preliminary data for 2023 indicate a case fatality rate (CFR) of 11% and a sex ratio of 1.7 (M: F). The median age of cases is 25 years, with two-thirds (69%) of cases aged over 15 years.  Suboptimal surveillance capacity exists in many affected countries, with data fragmentation, limited integration with routine surveillance and clinical systems, and a lack of standardized case definitions that contribute to underreporting and increased mortality rates.

During the last quarter of 2023 and as of 25 February 2024, a total of eight countries (Cameroon, Chad, Congo, DRC, Guinea, Niger, Nigeria, and South Sudan), have reported active YF transmission with confirmed YF cases (Table 1). These countries have initiated response planning activities.

Chad, Gabon, Niger, Nigeria, and Togo** are currently awaiting the final classification of the YF laboratory plaque reduction neutralization test (PRNT) positive samples.

Cameroon: Three YF cases were confirmed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing, occurring in the weeks ending on 22 October and 13 November 2023. The country recorded probable and confirmed YF cases consistently throughout 2023, starting from the week ending 29 January 2023.

Chad: A yellow fever PCR-positive case with negative serology was reported on 18 January 2024 from a patient sampled on 10 October 2023, in the Léré district of the Mayo-Kebbi Ouest region.

Republic of the Congo: Cases pending classification with the national health authorities. No further information was available as of February 2024.

Democratic Republic of the Congo: One YF PCR-positive case with unknown vaccination status was reported on    18 December 2023. Additionally, nine PRNT positive cases were recorded, eight of which have unknown vaccination status and one lacks information in the medical charts.

Guinea: Three YF PCR-positive cases were confirmed at the Institute Pasteur Dakar (IPD). These cases were reported on 17 October and 23 December 2023 in a 6-year-old female from Faranah region, a 7-year-old male from the Koundara health district (sample collected on 6 December), and a 60-year-old female from the Guiéckédou district (sample collected on 15 December), representing three out of the seven country’s regions. Notably, this occurrence is less than three years since cases were confirmed in the Koundara health district in 2020 and 2021.

Niger: Case reported in the Tahoua city, Department of Tahoua during the first week of January 2024. No further information was available as of February 2024. Investigations are ongoing.

Nigeria: One YF PRNT-positive case was reported in January 2024 in Lagos state in a 49-year-old male residing in a rural area. Investigations are ongoing.

South Sudan: A confirmed YF case was reported on 24 December 2023, following the investigation of suspected cases and deaths of viral hemorrhagic fever. The case, a 24-year-old male, presented with fever, vomiting blood, and jaundice. Two additional cases were confirmed on 2 February 2024. As of 12 February 2024, South Sudan reported a total of 64 cases that fulfil the current outbreak case definition of YF, including 61 suspected cases and three confirmed cases from six out of 10 counties in Western Equatoria state: Yambio (33), Nzara (09), Tambura (12), Ibba (4), Ezo (5) and Maridi Counties (1). Among 61 suspected cases, there were six suspected deaths currently under investigation.

Figure 1. Distribution of reported confirmed yellow fever cases in eight countries in the WHO African Region between 1 October 2023 (EW40/2023) and 21 February 2024 (EW8/2024) 



Table 1. Classification of reported confirmed yellow fever cases by country in the WHO African Region based on regional reference laboratory results and outputs of classification sessions, from 1 October 2023 (EW40/2023) to 21 February 2024 (EW8/2024).



Footnotes:

PRNT: Plaque reduction neutralization test

RT-qPCR: quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction

Confirmed case: a confirmed case of yellow fever virus infection by a positive RT-qPCR result

* Of note, during 2023, Cameroon reported 32 confirmed cases from all 10 country regions, including 23 PRNT-positive and nine RT-PCR-positive cases. Among the six PRNT positive samples, four were rejected. Notably, six cases were classified as confirmed within Douala's densely populated urban area during Epi Weeks 8 – 38 of 2023.

¥ Not available

** Kindly note that one case in Togo is pending classification

 Togo - EW 5 (29 Jan 2024) - During EW5, a 7-year-old female presented to the health care facility with fever and jaundice with no other symptoms. The child was vaccinated against YF, five years before and had no history of travel. Laboratory results showed a positive rapid diagnostic test for malaria, and she was treated accordingly. In addition, she presented a YF-PRNT result of 1/60. The child fully recovered from symptoms.   This case is pending case classification with the Ministry of Health.

Epidemiology
Yellow fever is an epidemic-prone, vaccine-preventable disease caused by an arbovirus transmitted to humans primarily through the bites of an infected Aedes spp. and Haemagogus spp. mosquitoes. The incubation period ranges from 3 to 6 days. Many people do not experience symptoms, but when they occur, the most common are fever, muscle pain with prominent back pain, headache, loss of appetite, and nausea or vomiting. In most cases, symptoms disappear after 3 to 4 days. A small percentage of cases progress to a toxic phase with systemic infection affecting the liver and kidneys. These individuals can have more severe symptoms of high-grade fever, abdominal pain with vomiting, jaundice and dark urine caused by acute liver and kidney failure. Bleeding can occur from the mouth, nose, eyes, or stomach.  Death can occur within 7 to 10 days in about half of cases with severe symptoms.

Yellow fever is prevented by an effective vaccine, which is safe and affordable. A single dose of yellow fever vaccine is sufficient to grant sustained immunity and life-long protection against yellow fever disease. A booster dose of the vaccine is not needed. The vaccine provides effective immunity within 10 days for 80-100% of people vaccinated, and within 30 days for more than 99% of people vaccinated.

Public health response
To respond to yellow fever outbreaks, regional and national public health measures have been organized across several domains.

Coordination - Countries have developed and rolled out national response plans aimed at tackling YF outbreaks with a focus on preventive measures, improved surveillance, and reactive vaccination campaigns. As per its strategy, the global Eliminate Yellow Fever Epidemics (EYE) secretariat led the coordination of significant preventive and reactive efforts and, notably, during 2023, substantially enhanced vaccination coverage. Approximately 62 million people have been protected in Africa through PMVC and reactive mass vaccination campaigns (RMVC). Also, approximately      17.4 million children are protected through Routine Immunization in Africa. The WHO Regional Office for Africa, in conjunction with the EYE Strategy Secretariat, is supporting countries in their efforts to prevent and respond to YF outbreaks.

Surveillance - Efforts have been bolstered in some countries including Cameroon, the Central African Republic and Guinea, to enhance their systems for the early detection and monitoring of cases. This includes conducting root cause analyses to understand the factors driving outbreaks and performing immunity gap analyses to pinpoint vulnerable population groups for targeted vaccination efforts.

Case Management and Vector control – Improvements have been made in capacity building for the clinical case management and measures for prevention and control have been enhanced nationally in the most affected countries. Vector control activities have also been planned in urban areas with confirmed YF cases to curb further spread.

Laboratory testing - There has been a significant strengthening of capabilities. National reference laboratories have enhanced YF IgM testing and PCR diagnosis capacities in some countries, complemented by regional reference laboratories for confirmatory testing. This strengthening extends to national and regional levels, facilitated by EYE strategy operations.

Vaccination – Vaccination campaigns form a crucial pillar in the YF outbreak response.
In 2023, nearly 62 million individuals received vaccinations under the EYE strategy. This comprised 57.2 million reached through Preventive Mass Vaccination Campaigns (PMVCs) in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Nigeria, and Uganda, along with 686 405 individuals vaccinated through reactive campaigns in areas including the Central African Republic (Mbaiki), Guinea (Dabola district and Dinguiraye), and Niger (Gazaoua). Additionally, approximately   4 million individuals received   vaccination against YF under catch-up campaigns in Sudan. All International Coordination Group (ICG) requests for vaccination have been met with funding and technical support, ensuring a timely vaccine supply to affected countries.

Risk Communication and Community Engagement - These involve targeted communication strategies to enhance awareness about YF risks, preventive measures, and the importance of vaccination, especially targeting hard to reach populations such as nomads, refugees, forest workers, and internally displaced persons. Engagement with these communities is being prioritized to ensure a comprehensive understanding of YF risks and the benefits of vaccination.

This multi-faceted approach, which covers coordination, surveillance, case management, laboratory enhancement, vaccination, vector control and community engagement, underscores the essential components of the public health response to Yellow Fever outbreaks.

Despite these robust measures, certain vulnerabilities remain. These include the challenge of competing outbreaks which may divert resources and delay response efforts, surveillance and laboratory challenges characterized by inadequate logistics, poor sample collection, and lengthy diagnostics turnaround times, and observed delays in reactive vaccination following yellow fever cases and submissions of ICG requests.

As of 4 March 2024, WHO is providing technical support to the national health authorities of Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Congo, DRC, South Sudan and Togo to assess the final classification of cases.

WHO risk assessment
As part of the ongoing efforts to monitor and respond to infectious disease outbreaks, on 12 February 2024, the World Health Organization conducted a Rapid Risk Assessment for yellow fever. It aimed to reassess the current regional risk of multiple ongoing YF outbreaks, in the context of a resurgence of YF outbreaks in countries with a history of preventive vaccination campaigns and persisting immunity gaps, including capacities to support the response (e.g., technical capacities, vaccine supply and vaccination campaigns, laboratory and operations, support and logistics (OSL)) and to provide recommendations for a more effective and coordinated response.

The overall risk at the regional level was re-assessed as moderate based on several contributing factors observed in the region despite the efforts to control the spread of YF:

Stable number of ongoing outbreaks across the region.
Persistence of pockets of unimmunized populations although considerable efforts have been made in recent years to protect the population through PMVC and reactive mass vaccination campaigns (RMVC).
Detection of YF confirmed cases in urban areas, such as Douala city in Cameroon, which pose significant risks due to high population density and international travel connections, noting nevertheless the risk mitigation provided by a relatively high average vaccination coverage
Risk of cross-border spread, particularly from the outbreak in South Sudan, which shares borders with neighbouring countries.
Limited surveillance and laboratory capacity in certain regions may result in delayed detection, underestimation of the extent of the disease and delayed response.
Persisting response challenges with the case classification, investigation, and response operations, exacerbated by competing health emergencies.
Competing outbreaks strainthe capacity to respond effectively, with various simultaneous health crises, including measles, poliomyelitis, mpox, cholera, diphtheria, hepatitis E, Lassa fever, and dengue. These challenges are compounded by factors such as food insecurity, security constraints, and complex humanitarian contexts. Furthermore, public health and medical personnel are overburdened, managing multiple parallel outbreaks alongside other health emergencies.
Socio-economic factors, high levels of poverty and limited resource allocation contribute to the challenge of controlling outbreaks effectively.
While the global risk remains low, active surveillance is required due to the potential for onward transmission through viremic travellers and the presence of the competent vector in neighbouring regions.

While progress has been made in controlling outbreaks, ongoing challenges and vulnerabilities underscore the need for sustained and coordinated efforts to protect public health. The impact on public health will persist until the ongoing outbreaks are controlled, vaccination coverage is high and immunity gaps in the population closed. The importation of cases to countries with suboptimal coverage and persisting population immunity gaps poses a high risk and may jeopardize the tremendous efforts invested to achieve elimination.

WHO advice
Yellow Fever is an epidemic-prone mosquito-borne vaccine- preventable disease transmitted to humans by infected mosquitoes, notably Aedes sp. and Haemagogus species. The urban proliferation of Aedes spp. mosquitoes (day feeders)) can significantly amplify transmission risks, particularly in densely populated areas, leading to swift outbreaks.

Surveillance and Coordination: WHO emphasizes the importance of active surveillance, cross-border coordination, and information sharing. Investigating and testing suspected cases is crucial for outbreak control and prevention. Enhanced surveillance with investigation and laboratory testing of suspect cases is recommended.

Vaccination as a Primary Prevention Tool: Vaccination is the primary means for prevention and control of YF. The WHO's EYE strategy prioritizes vaccination in countries reporting YF, integrating it into routine immunization schedules for individuals aged 9 months and above. Proof of vaccination is required for travellers to and from countries with YF risk, with specific exemptions. The WHO supports the expansion of vaccination coverage through routine programs and mass vaccination campaigns to enhance communal immunity.

Guidance for International Travelers: All international travellers aged 9 months and above heading to areas at risk of YF transmission, as determined by WHO, are advised to get vaccinated. The vaccine is deemed safe and effective, offering life-long protection. However, vaccination recommendations for infants under 9 months, and pregnant or breastfeeding women are nuanced, advocating for vaccination in high-risk scenarios after weighing the benefits against potential risks.

Regulatory Aspects and Vaccine Validity: Under the International Health Regulations (IHR 2005), countries have the autonomy to require proof of YF vaccination from incoming travellers. The International Certificate of Vaccination or Prophylaxis (ICVP) must document this vaccination, with validity extending throughout the vaccinated individual's lifetime. WHO-approved YF vaccines guarantee lifelong immunity, negating the need for booster doses for international travel.

Vector Control and Risk Communication: Effective vector control in urban settings and general mosquito bite avoidance strategies are recommended to prevent disease transmission. WHO urges Member States to inform travellers about YF risks, preventive measures, and to seek immediate medical attention if symptoms arise. This approach helps prevent the establishment of local transmission cycles through infected travellers.

International Travel and Trade: WHO advises against imposing travel or trade restrictions related to YF. Continuous efforts to educate travellers on preventive measures, including vaccination, are encouraged.

Additional Recommendations: Given the evolving nature of YF transmission, WHO advises Member States to remain updated with the latest information and guidelines available on the WHO International Travel and Health website. Local health authorities are encouraged to collaborate closely with WHO and other relevant stakeholders to implement effective YF prevention and control measures, ensuring the safety and well-being of populations at risk.

Situation at a glance
In February 2024, Austria, Denmark, Germany, Sweden and The Netherlands reported an increase in psittacosis cases observed in 2023 and at the beginning of 2024, particularly marked since November-December 2023. Five deaths were also reported. Exposure to wild and/or domestic birds was reported in most of the cases. Psittacosis is a respiratory infection caused by Chlamydophila psittaci (C. psittaci), a bacteria that often infects birds. Human infections occur mainly through contact with secretions from infected birds and are mostly associated with those who work with pet birds, poultry workers, veterinarians, pet bird owners, and gardeners in areas where C. psittaci is epizootic in the native bird population. The concerned countries have implemented epidemiological investigations to identify potential exposures and clusters of cases. Additionally, implemented measures include the analysis of samples from wild birds submitted for avian influenza testing to verify the prevalence of C. psittaci among wild birds. The World Health Organization continues to monitor the situation and, based on the available information, assesses the risk posed by this event as low.
Description of the situation
Austria

In Austria, 14 confirmed cases of psittacosis were reported from five of the nine federal states in 2023, compared to the median of two cases (range: 1-4) per year in the previous eight years. In 2024, there have been four cases of psittacosis reported as of 4 March 2024, with the earliest onset date of 24 January 2024. None of these unrelated cases notified in 2023 or 2024 have reported travel abroad and wild birds have not been mentioned as a source of infection.

In Austria, suspected and confirmed psittacosis cases, as well as deaths due to psittacosis are notifiable. The country did not report changes in diagnostic procedures (currently, serological tests are used) that could explain this increase in reported psittacosis cases.

Denmark

Denmark reported a marked increase in psittacosis cases from late 2023 to mid-January 2024. As of 27 February 2024, 23 individuals tested positive for C. psittaci via RT-PCR. Most of the cases were reported from the North Denmark Region, Zealand Region, and the Capital Region. Seventeen cases (74%) were hospitalized, of whom 15 had pneumonia and four died.

From the epidemiological investigations, one case has been linked to domestic birds that tested positive for C. psittaci. Of the 15 other cases with exposure information available, 12 (80%) have indicated contact with wild birds (primarily via bird feeders). For three cases there is no information available on bird exposures, and for the remaining four cases, no direct bird contact has been reported. Transmission from chickens has been ruled out by testing of suspected birds in two of the cases with reported bird contact.

Over the past five years, Denmark has reported between 15 to 30 human cases annually, most of which have been linked to exposure to domestic birds (e.g. parrots, parakeets, hobby birds such as racing pigeons) and ducks handled during hunting; however, each year several cases report no direct contact with birds, which suggests potential environmental exposure. There is no indication of increased testing or change in testing procedures in Denmark that could explain the current increase in psittacosis cases.

The National Health Institute of Denmark, Statens Serum Institute, suspects that infections are primarily associated with wild birds through the inhalation of airborne particles from the dried droppings of infected birds. The prevalence of C. psittaci among wild birds in Denmark is currently unknown, and plans are underway to examine samples from wild birds submitted for avian influenza testing to clarify this. It is assumed that the actual number of individuals infected with C. psittaci is much higher than reported. Some cases may be associated with exposure to domesticated psittacines (including parrots) or other birds that can carry the bacteria asymptomatically.

Germany

Germany reported an increase in individuals who tested positive for C. psittaci in December 2023 with five confirmed cases, making a total of 14 confirmed cases in 2023. In 2024, as of 20 February, another five confirmed cases of psittacosis were notified. There are no reports of a geographical cluster, except with an accumulation of cases around the city of Hannover over the last year. Almost all cases had pneumonia (18/19), 16 of whom were hospitalized.

Among the 19 cases notified from 1 January 2023 to 19 February 2024, none had information on exposure to wild birds, although 26% (5/19) of cases reported exposure to domesticated birds such as parrots, chickens, or breeding pigeons.

Over the past five years, Germany has reported an average of 15 cases per year, with the highest number of cases in 2022 (19 cases) and the lowest number in 2019 (11 cases). Usually, around zero to two cases per month are reported. Around 72% (56/78) of the cases in the last five years were confirmed by antibody testing. Information on bird exposure is often missing.

Sweden

Sweden reported an unusually high number of cases of psittacosis in late November 2023 and early December 2023, with seven cases reported in November 2023 and 19 cases reported in December 2023. This represents a doubling of the number of cases compared to respective months in the previous five years.

In 2024, however, ten cases were reported in January and three cases in February, which is lower than the average number of cases reported in the same period in the previous five years. Overall, Sweden reported an increase in the number of reported cases of psittacosis from 2017 onwards.

Geographically, cases reported as of early November 2023, are distributed between eight of the 21 regions of Sweden, all located in the southernmost third of the country. Reported cases have been in contact with droppings from small birds, mainly via feeders, and a few are thought to have been infected via domestic birds (hens or cockatoos).

Changes in diagnostic practices have likely contributed to this increase, as it has become increasingly common to use RT-PCR panels for screening.

The Netherlands

The Netherlands observed an increase of confirmed psittacosis cases since late December 2023, with 21 individuals reported as positive for C. psittaci as of 29 February 2024, which is twice as many cases as the same period in previous years. Over the past ten years, there has been an average of nine cases reported during the same period.

Recent cases have been geographically spread throughout the country with no common source of infection being identified. The cases had an average age of 67 (range: 37-86 years), of whom 16 were men (76%). All recent cases were hospitalized and one case died. Six of the 21 cases reported since late December 2023 have noted contact with droppings of wild birds, seven had contact with droppings of domestic birds, and eight cases did not report any contact with birds.

 

Testing procedures have not changed in recent years in the Netherlands. Since 2018, more than 95% of the notifications are based on RT-PCR testing.

Epidemiology
Chlamydophila psittaci is a bacterium that causes the zoonotic disease of psittacosis in humans. Human infections are generally associated with those who work with pet birds, poultry workers, veterinarians, pet bird owners, and gardeners in areas where C. psittaci is epizootic in the native bird population.

C. psittaci is associated with more than 450 avian species and has also been found in various mammalian species, including dogs, cats, horses, large and small ruminants, swine, and reptiles. However, birds, especially pet birds (psittacine birds, finches, canaries, and pigeons), are most frequently involved in causing human psittacosis. Disease transmission to humans occurs mainly through inhalation of airborne particles from respiratory secretions, dried faeces, or feather dust. Direct contact with birds is not required for infection to occur.

In general, psittacosis is a mild illness, with symptoms including fever and chills, headache, muscle aches and dry cough. Most people begin developing signs and symptoms within 5 to 14 days after exposure to the bacteria. Prompt antibiotic treatment is effective and allows avoiding complications such as pneumonia. With appropriate antibiotic treatment, psittacosis rarely (less than 1 in 100 cases) results in death.

Public health response
Human psittacosis is a notifiable disease in the concerned countries. Epidemiological investigations were implemented to identify potential exposure and clusters of cases.

National surveillance systems are closely monitoring the situation, including laboratory analysis of samples from wild birds submitted for avian influenza testing to verify the prevalence of C. psittaci among wild birds.

WHO risk assessment
Overall, five countries in the WHO European region reported an unusual and unexpected increase in reports of cases of C. psittaci.  Some of the reported cases developed pneumonia and resulted in hospitalization, and fatal cases were also reported.

Sweden has reported a general increase in psittacosis cases since 2017, which could be associated with the increased use of more sensitive polymerase chain reaction (PCR) panels. The increase in reported psittacosis cases across all countries requires additional investigation to determine whether it is a true increase in cases or an increase due to more sensitive surveillance or diagnostic techniques.

While birds that carry this disease could be crossing international borders, there is currently no indication of this disease being spread by humans nationally or internationally. Generally, people do not spread the bacteria that causes psittacosis to other people, so there is a low likelihood of further human-to-human transmission of the disease. If correctly diagnosed, this pathogen is treatable by antibiotics.

WHO continues to monitor the situation, and based on the available information, assesses the risk posed by this event as low.

WHO advice
WHO recommends the following measures for the prevention and control of psittacosis:

increasing the awareness of clinicians to test suspected cases of C. psittaci for diagnosis using RT-PCR.
increasing awareness among caged or domestic bird owners, especially psittacines, that the pathogen can be carried without apparent illness.
quarantining newly acquired birds. If any bird is sick, contact the veterinarian for an examination and treatment.
conducting surveillance of C. psittaci in wild birds, potentially including existing specimens collected for other reasons.
encouraging people with pet birds to keep cages clean, position cages so that droppings cannot spread among them and avoid over-crowded cages.
promoting good hygiene, including frequent hand washing, when handling birds, their faeces, and their environments.
standard infection-control practices and droplet transmission precautions should be implemented for hospitalized patients.


Situation at a glance
Outbreaks of Nipah virus (NiV) infection are seasonal in Bangladesh, with cases usually occurring annually between December and April corresponding with the harvesting and consumption of date palm sap. Since 1 January and as of 9 February 2024, two laboratory-confirmed cases of NiV have been reported from the Dhaka division of Bangladesh. Both cases have died. WHO assesses the overall risk at the national levels to be moderate due to the severity of the disease, the limitation of treatment, the shared natural habitat of bats and zoonotic transmission partners, and the fact that there are no licensed vaccines to prevent NiV infection.
Description of the situation
On 30 January and 7 February 2024, the Bangladesh National Focal Point (NFP) for the International Health Regulations (IHR) notified the World Health Organization (WHO) of two epidemiologically unlinked cases of NiV infection.

First case confirmed on 21 January 2024

The first patient is a 38-year-old male from Manikganj district, Dhaka division. The patient developed a fever followed by respiratory distress, restlessness, and insomnia on 11 January 2024 and was admitted to a local hospital on 16 January. He was transferred to the intensive care unit of a hospital in Dhaka City on 18 January where he was intubated due to worsening of symptoms.

On 21 January, blood and throat samples were collected and the patient tested positive by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for NiV RNA from the throat sample and by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for anti-NiV Immunoglobulin M (IgM) from serum. On 27 January, the case was transferred to another hospital in Dhaka city, where he died on 28 January. 

The case had a history of consuming raw date palm sap on 31 December 2023. As of 30 January 2024, a total of 91 contacts had been identified, including 11 family members, 20 from the community, and 60 healthcare personnel from different hospitals. However, none of the contacts tested positive for NiV by PCR or anti-NiV IgM by ELISA. 

Second case confirmed on 31 January 2024

The second patient is a three-year-old female from Shariatpur district, Dhaka division. The patient visited a healthcare facility on 30 January 2024 with a two-day history of fever, altered consciousnesses, and seizures. The case was diagnosed with encephalitis and shock and was transferred to the isolation ward of another hospital in Dhaka city on the same day. Blood and throat samples were collected on 30 January and on 31 January, the case was laboratory-confirmed with NiV infection by RT-PCR for NiV RNA from the throat sample and by ELISA for anti-NiV IgM from serum and died on the same day.  

The case had a history of regularly consuming fresh raw date palm sap. As of 7 February 2024, 67 contacts were identified, including three family members, 21 from the community and 46 healthcare personnel from different hospitals. All identified contacts tested negative for NiV by PCR or anti-NiV IgM by ELISA.

Since the report of the first case in 2001, human infections have been reported almost every year, with case fatality rate varying between 25% (in 2009) and 92% (in 2005) (Figure 1). Clusters of cases are mainly reported in the country’s central and northwest districts. 

Figure 1. Number of reported Nipah virus cases and deaths by year, 1 January 2001 – 9 February 2024, Bangladesh.



Epidemiology
NiV infection is a bat-borne zoonotic disease transmitted to humans through infected animals (such as bats or pigs) or food contaminated with saliva, urine and excreta of infected animals. It can also be transmitted directly from person to person through close contact with an infected person (although less common). Fruit bats or flying foxes (Pteropus species) are the natural hosts for Nipah virus.

The incubation period is believed to range from 4 to 14 days. However, an incubation period of up to 45 days has been reported. Laboratory diagnosis of a patient with a clinical history of NiV infection can be made during the acute and convalescent phases of the disease by using a combination of tests. The main tests used are RT-PCR from bodily fluids and antibody detection via ELISA.

NiV infection in humans causes a range of clinical presentations including acute respiratory infection and fatal encephalitis. Further information about NiV infection can be found here.

The case-fatality rates in outbreaks across Bangladesh, India, Malaysia, and Singapore typically range from 40% to 100%, depending on local capabilities for early detection and clinical management. Although antivirals are in development, there are no licensed vaccines or therapeutics available for the prevention or treatment of NiV infection.

Public health response
The following public health response has been implemented by the government of Bangladesh and WHO:

Nationwide awareness and health education activities are ongoing through print and electronic media, including distribution of posters and leaflets in the endemic districts. 
Risk communication activities engaging government officials, physicians, preachers, and farmers are ongoing. As of 31 January, these have been completed in Rajshahi, Jashore, Madaripur and Rajbari districts. 
WHO is working with the counterparts to strengthen surveillance, infection, prevention and control (IPC), risk communication, prompt diagnosis and management of infected patients.
One Health Partners (Department of Livestock, Bangladesh Livestock Research Institute, Department of Forest, icddr,b) have been sensitized and engaged. Printed leaflets with health education messages have been produced. 
WHO risk assessment
WHO assesses the overall risk at the national level to be moderate due to following reasons:

The case fatality rate from NiV infection is high. Initial signs and symptoms of Nipah virus infection are non-specific, and the diagnosis is often not suspected at the time of presentation. This can hinder accurate diagnosis and creates challenges in outbreak detection, effective and timely infection control measures, and outbreak response activities.
There are currently no specific drugs or vaccines available for NiV infection although WHO has identified Nipah as a priority disease for the WHO Research and Development Blueprint.  Intensive supportive care is recommended to treat severe respiratory and neurologic complications.
There is continued consumption of raw date palm sap by the community despite ongoing efforts for risk communication and community engagement to address food safety and risks to health.
Despite these risk criteria, strong public health measures are in place to detect and control outbreaks including through the use of hospital-based systematic human NiV infection surveillance system which has been in place since 2006, and the utilization of the National Rapid Response Team (NRRT) at the central level and the Rapid Response Team (RRT) at the district level.
WHO assesses the risk at the regional level to be moderate. Although Bangladesh borders India and Myanmar, currently affected districts do not share an international land border. While there have not been any instances of cross-border transmission previously, this risk remains given the shared ecological corridor for the virus natural host (Pteropus bats) and occurrence among domestic animals and humans previously in both Bangladesh and India. India, however, has experience of controlling previous outbreaks of NiV infection. 

WHO assesses the risk at the global level to be low, as there have been no previous confirmed cases outside Bangladesh, India, Malaysia, and Singapore.   

WHO advice
In the absence of a vaccine or licensed treatment available for Nipah virus disease, the key to reducing or preventing infection is by strengthening early detection surveillance and contact tracing, raising awareness of the risk factors and supporting people with measures they can take to reduce exposure to the NiV. Case management should focus on the delivery of timely supportive care and be supported by a good laboratory system. Intensive supportive care is recommended to treat severe respiratory and neurologic complications. 

Public health educational messages should focus on: 

Reducing the risk of bat-to-human transmission 
Efforts to prevent transmission should first focus on decreasing bat access to date palm sap and other fresh food products. Freshly collected date palm juice should be boiled, and fruits should be thoroughly washed and peeled before consumption. Fruits with signs of bat bites should be discarded. Areas where bats are known to roost should be avoided. 

Reducing the risk of animal-to-human transmission
Natural infection in animals has been described in farming pigs, horses, and domestic and feral cats. Gloves and other protective clothing should be worn while handling sick animals or their tissues, and during slaughtering and culling procedures. As much as possible, people should avoid being in contact with infected pigs. In endemic areas, when establishing new pig farms, considerations should be given to presence of fruit bats in the area and in general, pig feed and pig sheds should be protected against bats when feasible.  

Reducing the risk of human-to-human transmission
Close unprotected physical contact with NiV-infected people should be avoided. Regular hand washing should be carried out after caring for or visiting sick people.  

Controlling infection in health care settings  

Health care workers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed infection, or handling their specimens, should implement standard infection control precautions at all times.   As human-to-human transmission has been reported, particularly in health-care settings, contact and droplet precautions should be used along with standard precautions. Airborne precautions may be required in certain circumstances.  Samples taken from people and animals with suspected NiV infection should be handled by trained staff working in suitably equipped laboratories.  

WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions toward Bangladesh based on the currently available information. 


Situation at a glance
This is the bi-annual update on the Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV) infections reported to the World Health Organization (WHO) from the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA). From 13 August 2023 to 1 February 2024, four laboratory-confirmed cases of MERS-CoV, including two deaths, were reported to WHO by the Ministry of Health of the KSA, with the last case being reported on 26 October 2023. Close contacts of the four cases were followed up by the Ministry of Health, and no secondary cases were identified. The notification of these four cases does not change the overall risk assessment, with the risk being moderate at both the global and regional level. The reporting of these cases reiterates the need for global awareness of MERS-CoV as the virus continues to pose a threat in countries where MERS-CoV is circulating in dromedary camels, including those in the Middle East.
Description of the situation
Between 13 August 2023 and 1 February 2024, the Ministry of Health (MoH) of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA) reported four cases of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), including two deaths. The cases were reported from the Riyadh, Eastern, and Qassim regions of the KSA (Figure 1). Laboratory confirmation of the cases was performed by real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) between 10 October 2023 and 16 November 2023.

All four cases had co-morbidities and none were health care workers. Two cases were male and two female, ranging in age from 59 to 93 years. The cases developed symptoms, including fever, cough, and shortness of breath, between 15 September 2023 and 26 October 2023. The two deaths occurred on 19 October 2023 and 24 December 2023.

Of the four cases, one was a camel owner, and another one had a history of indirect contact with dromedary camels as their family members were camel owners. For the other two cases, there was no clear history of exposure to known risk factors. None of them reported having a history of consumption of raw camel milk in the 14 days prior to the onset of symptoms. There are no known epidemiological links among the cases.

Since the first report of MERS-CoV in KSA in 2012, a total of 2200 human cases have been reported, including 858 deaths. Overall, human infections of MERS-CoV have been reported from 27 countries, in all six WHO regions. Of the 2609 MERS-CoV cases and 939 deaths reported globally, 84% and 91%, respectively, have been reported from KSA, including these newly reported cases and deaths. (Figure 2). Since 2019, no MERS-CoV cases have been reported from countries outside the Middle East.

Figure 1. Geographical distribution of MERS-CoV cases between 13 August 2023 to 1 February 2024 by city and region, KSA (n=4). 

Figure 2:  Epidemic curve of MERS-CoV cases (n=2200) and deaths (n=858) reported in KSA between 2012-2024* 

Epidemiology
Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) is a viral respiratory infection caused by the MERS-CoV. Approximately 36% of patients with MERS have died, though this may be an overestimate of the true mortality rate, as mild cases of MERS-CoV may be missed by existing surveillance systems, and the case fatality ratio (CFR) is calculated based only on laboratory-confirmed cases.

Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect contact with dromedary camels, which are the natural host and zoonotic source of the virus. MERS-CoV has demonstrated the ability to transmit between humans. So far, non-sustained human-to-human transmission has occurred among close contacts and in health care settings. Outside of health care settings there has been limited human-to-human transmission to date.

MERS disease ranges from having no symptoms (asymptomatic) or mild respiratory symptoms, to severe acute respiratory disease and death. A typical presentation of MERS disease is fever, cough, and shortness of breath. Pneumonia is a common finding, but not always present. Gastrointestinal symptoms, including diarrhoea, have also been reported. Severe illness can cause respiratory failure that requires mechanical ventilation and support in an intensive care unit. The virus appears to cause more severe disease in older people, persons with weakened immune systems, and those with comorbidities or chronic diseases such as renal disease, cancer, chronic lung disease, and diabetes.

The number of MERS-CoV cases reported to WHO has substantially declined since the beginning of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. Initially, this was likely the result of epidemiological surveillance activities for COVID-19 being prioritized. The similar clinical picture of both diseases may result in reduced testing and detection of MERS-CoV cases. In addition, measures taken to reduce SARS-CoV-2 transmission (e.g., mask-wearing, hand hygiene, physical distancing, improving the ventilation of indoor spaces, respiratory etiquette, stay-at-home orders, reduced mobility) also likely reduced opportunities for onward human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV. Potential cross-protection conferred from infection with or vaccination against SARS-CoV-2 and any reduction in MERS-CoV infection or disease severity and vice versa has been hypothesized but requires further investigation.

No vaccine or specific treatment is currently available, although several MERS-CoV-specific vaccines and therapeutics are in development. Treatment is supportive and based on the patient’s clinical condition and symptoms.

Public health response
Follow-up of the close contacts was conducted by the MoH for all four cases, and no secondary cases were identified.
For the two cases reporting direct and indirect contact with camels, the Ministry of Agriculture was informed, and an investigation of camels was conducted. The camels were found symptom-free, but no laboratory results of the animal investigation were shared with WHO. Dromedary camels infected with MERS-CoV may not show any signs of infection which makes it impossible to know if a camel or herd is infectious without doing laboratory tests. Preventive measures like good hygiene practices including strict hand washing before and after handling camels and heat treatment of camel products should therefore be implemented at all times.

WHO risk assessment
The notification of these four cases does not change the overall risk assessment, with the risk being moderate at both the global and regional level. The four new cases reported between 13 August 2023 and 1 February 2024 are believed to have acquired MERS-CoV infection locally and not to have transmitted it further. 

WHO expects that additional cases of MERS-CoV infection will be reported from the Middle East and/or other countries where MERS-CoV is circulating in dromedaries, and that cases will continue to be exported to other countries by individuals who were exposed to the virus through contact with dromedaries or their products (for example, consumption of raw camel milk), or in a health care setting. 

WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessment based on the latest available information.

WHO advice
Based on the current situation and available information, WHO re-emphasizes the importance of strong surveillance by all Member States for acute respiratory infections, including MERS-CoV, and to carefully review and investigate any unusual patterns.

Human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV in health care settings has been associated with delays in recognizing the early symptoms of MERS-CoV infection, delayed triage of suspected cases, and delays in implementing infection prevention and control (IPC) measures. IPC measures are critical to prevent the possible spread of MERS-CoV between people in health care facilities. Health care workers should consistently apply standard precautions consistently with all patients, at every interaction in health care settings.

Contact and droplet precautions, which includes the use of personal protective equipment (PPE) such as clean non-sterile gown, gloves, eye protection and medical mask, should be added to the standard precautions when providing care to patients with MERS-CoV. Airborne precautions should be applied when performing aerosol-generating procedures or in settings where aerosol-generating procedures are conducted. Early identification, case management and isolation of cases, quarantine of contacts, together with appropriate IPC measures in health care setting and public health awareness can prevent human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV.

MERS-CoV infection appears to cause more severe disease in people with underlying chronic medical conditions such as diabetes, renal failure, chronic lung disease, and immunocompromised persons. Therefore, people with these underlying medical conditions should avoid close contact with animals, particularly dromedaries, when visiting farms, markets, or barn areas where the virus may be circulating. General hygiene measures should be adhered to, such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals and avoiding contact with sick animals. 

Food hygiene practices should be observed. People should avoid drinking raw camel milk, contact with camel urine or eating camel meat that has not been thoroughly cooked. The consumption of raw or undercooked animal products, including milk and meat, carries a high risk of infection from pathogens that may cause disease in humans. Animal products that are processed appropriately through cooking or pasteurization are safe for consumption. Foods that have gone through these processes should be handled with care to avoid cross contamination with uncooked/unsafe foods. Camel meat and camel milk are nutritious products that can continue to be consumed after cooking, pasteurization or other thermal treatments. 

WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry regarding this event, nor does it currently recommend the application of any travel or trade restrictions.

Situation at a glance
On 27 January 2024, the National Health Commission of the People’s Republic of China notified the World Health Organization (WHO) of one confirmed case of human coinfection with avian influenza A(H10N5) virus and seasonal influenza A(H3N2) virus. This is the first case of human infection with avian influenza A(H10N5) virus reported globally. The case occurred in a female farmer over 60 years of age, with a history of chronic comorbidities, from Xuancheng Prefecture, Anhui Province. She had onset of symptoms on 30 November 2023 and passed away on 16 December 2023. The authorities isolated seasonal influenza A(H3N2) subtype and avian influenza A(H10N5) subtype viruses from the patient’s samples on 22 January 2024, which were affirmed in confirmatory testing on 26 January 2024. The patient had exposure to live poultry, and poultry samples also tested positive for H10N5. No new suspected human cases have been detected through the investigation and testing done by authorities. Currently available epidemiologic information suggests that avian influenza A(H10Nx) viruses have not acquired the capacity for sustained transmission among humans. Thus, the likelihood of human-to-human spread is considered low.
Description of the situation
On 27 January 2024, the National Health Commission of the Peoples Republic of China notified WHO of one confirmed case of human coinfection with influenza A(H10N5) virus and seasonal influenza A(H3N2) virus. This is the first case of human infection with avian influenza A(H10N5) virus reported globally.

The case occurred in a female farmer over 60 years of age from Xuancheng Prefecture, Anhui Province, who had onset of symptoms of cough, sore throat and fever on 30 November 2023. The patient, who had a history of chronic comorbidities, was admitted to a local hospital on 2 December 2023 for treatment and was then transferred on 7 December 2023 to a medical institution in Zhejiang Province as her condition became more severe. The patient was diagnosed with influenza A virus infection. She passed away on 16 December 2023. Zhejiang Province health officials isolated seasonal influenza A(H3N2) subtype and avian influenza A(H10N5) subtype viruses from the patient’s samples on 22 January 2024 after nucleic acid testing, viral culture and gene sequencing conducted by local health care facilities.

On 26 January 2024, the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention conducted confirmatory testing on the samples from Zhejiang Province and verified the laboratory results. It was noted that the patient had not been vaccinated for seasonal influenza.

The patient had exposure to live poultry through the purchase of a duck on 26 November 2023. From the duck meat stored in the fridge, seven samples tested positive for H10N5, and two samples were positive for N5 (no result for haemagglutinin). The patient had no contact with pigs or other mammals. Environmental samples were collected from her home, and all tested negative.

Medical observation of all close contacts in Zhejiang and Anhui provinces has found no additional suspected cases. Retrospective case finding activities also did not identify any other cases during the same period.

Epidemiology
Avian influenza infections are caused by influenza viruses which normally circulate in several types of wild and domestic birds but can also infect humans and other animal species. Infections in humans are usually sporadic and mostly due to direct contact with infected animals or contaminated environments. The primary risk factor for human infection appears to be exposure to either infected live or dead poultry or contaminated environments, such as live bird markets. Current zoonotic influenza viruses have not demonstrated sustained person-to-person transmission.

Avian influenza infections in humans can cause high fever, cough, sore throat, and muscle aches among other initial symptoms. Depending on the factors related to the virus and the infected host, the disease may quickly progress to severe lung infection (pneumonia), acute respiratory distress syndrome and even altered mental status or seizures. 

Laboratory testing with reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction or other rapid molecular influenza assays (with similar high sensitivity and high specificity) are recommended when available.   Prompt treatment based on antivirals and supportive care should be the priority. Through the Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System, WHO closely monitors avian and other zoonotic influenza viruses.

Public health response
The Chinese government has taken the following monitoring, prevention, and further control measures, including:

Risk assessment.
Enhanced syndromic surveillance in local healthcare facilities.
Epidemiological investigation, close contact tracing, and monitoring.
Retrospective screening, case finding, environmental sampling and testing.
Authorities expanded surveillance and testing among live poultry and the environment in farms and slaughterhouses in the city where the case lived in Xuancheng Prefecture, Anhui Province. No new suspected human cases have been detected through the field surveillance and testing done by authorities.

The agricultural authority has conducted culling and hazard management of the ducks which tested positive for H10N5 in a traceback investigation and has carried out disinfection of affected areas.

WHO Regional and Country Office are facilitating communications under the International Health Regulations (IHR 2005) regarding the public health response. 

WHO risk assessment
Most human cases of infection with avian influenza viruses reported to date have been due to exposure to infected poultry or contaminated environments.

The first A(H10) subtype was isolated from chickens in Germany in 1949. Since then, A(H10) strains have occasionally been detected in wild waterfowl, domestic poultry, and mammals worldwide.  As the A(H10) viruses are low pathogenic avian influenza viruses, it is not required to be reported to the World Organisation for Animal Health, and therefore, their true prevalence is unknown.

In 2008, avian influenza A(H10N5) was isolated from swine in Hubei, China; however, the current H10N5 infection in a human in China is the first human case of avian influenza A(H10N5) detected globally.

Due to limited data, further research is needed to determine the epidemiology of H10N5 viruses among animal populations to help inform surveillance efforts and preventive measures. Surveillance is important to monitor the spread of the virus, particularly in bird populations, considering the sporadic nature of human infections with other H10Nx subtypes such as H10N3.

Currently available epidemiologic information suggests that avian influenza A(H10Nx) viruses have not acquired the capacity for sustained transmission among humans. Thus, the likelihood of human-to-human spread is considered low. Should infected individuals from affected areas travel internationally, their infection may be detected in another country during travel or after arrival. If this were to occur, further community-level spread is considered unlikely. 

WHO advice
The public should avoid high-risk environments, such as live animal markets or farms, and avoid contact with live poultry or surfaces that might be contaminated by birds or poultry droppings. Hand hygiene with frequent handwashing or using alcohol-based hand sanitizer is recommended. 

Due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect virological, epidemiological, and clinical changes associated with circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal) health, and timely virus sharing for risk assessment.

All human infections caused by a new subtype of influenza virus are notifiable under the International Health Regulations (IHR, 2005). States Parties to the IHR (2005) are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a recent human infection caused by an influenza A virus with the potential to cause a pandemic. Evidence of illness is not required for this report.

WHO does not recommend any specific measures for travelers. WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions toward China based on the currently available information.

Situation at a glance
On 29 January 2024, the Spanish health authorities notified the World Health Organization (WHO) of a laboratory confirmed human case of infection with swine-origin influenza A(H1N1) variant (v) virus, in the province of Lleida (Cataluña autonomous community), Spain. Including the current case, three cases of human infection with influenza A(H1N1)v virus have been reported in Spain. The first case was reported in 2008 and the second case was reported in January 2023. According to the International Health Regulations (IHR) 2005, a human infection caused by a novel influenza A virus subtype is an event that has the potential for high public health impact and must be notified to the WHO. Based on the currently available information, no ongoing community transmission has been identified in this case. Thus, the risk of international disease spread through humans and/or community-level spread among humans is low. WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect virological, epidemiological and clinical changes associated with circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal) health and timely virus sharing for risk assessment.
Description of the situation
On 29 January 2024, the National authorities of Spain notified WHO of a laboratory confirmed human infection with a swine influenza A(H1N1)v virus in the country. The patient is an adult male who worked on a pig farm in the province of Lleida, who was confirmed positive through sample testing and sequencing. 

The patient, who has completely recovered, developed symptoms on 25 November 2023. These included fever, malaise, and cough. He first attended an outpatient clinic on 29 November 2023, and was seen again twice in December 2023, where he was diagnosed with bronchitis. He did not receive any antiviral treatment. 

On 12 December 2023, a nasal and oropharyngeal (back of the mouth and throat) sample was taken and sent to the laboratory of the regional hospital for testing, where it tested positive for an influenza A virus on 14 December 2023 but could not be subtyped.  

The sample was subsequently sent to a national surveillance network lab for sequencing, where swine influenza A(H1N1) virus was identified and notified to the General Sub-Directorate for Surveillance and Response to Public Health Emergencies of Catalonia on 10 January 2024. 

The sample was sent for confirmation to the National Institute of Microbiology on 19 January 2024 and the virus isolate will also be shared with the WHO Collaborating Centre for Reference and Research on Influenza at the Francis Crick Institute in London, United Kingdom.

Epidemiology
Influenza A (H1) viruses are enzootic in swine populations in most regions of the world. When an influenza virus that normally circulates in swine is detected in a person, it is called a “variant influenza virus”. A(H1N1), A(H1N2), and A(H3N2) are major subtypes of swine influenza A viruses in pigs which occasionally infect humans, usually after direct or indirect exposure to pigs or contaminated environments. Human infections with variant viruses tend to result in mild clinical illness, although some cases have been hospitalized with more severe disease and some have been fatal. 

To date, sporadic human infections caused by influenza A(H3N2), A(H1N1), and A(H1N2) variant viruses have been reported in the WHO European Region; there has been no evidence of sustained human-to-human transmission. Including the current case, three cases of human infection with influenza A(H1N1)v virus have been reported in Spain. The first case was reported in 2008[1] and the second case was reported in January 2023.

Public health response
Epidemiological investigations were initiated by public health authorities in Catalonia. No secondary cases were identified among the three close family contacts. None of the other farm workers have reported symptoms to date, and follow-up of these workers has been completed.

The General Sub-Directorate for Surveillance and Response to Public Health Emergencies of Catalonia contacted the Department of Climate Action, Food and Rural Agenda, responsible for animal health, which confirmed that outbreaks of influenza A in swine are not subject to mandatory notification, and there is no control or follow up expected in the swine population.

WHO risk assessment
Most human cases with influenza A(H1N1)v virus infection result from exposure to swine influenza viruses through direct or indirect contact with infected swine or contaminated environments. However, some cases have been reported without an apparent source of exposure to swine in the weeks prior to illness onset. Because these viruses continue to be detected in swine populations worldwide, further human cases following direct or indirect contact with infected swine can be expected. Swine variant cases have been reported in recent years from many countries, including in Europe.

Current evidence suggests that these viruses have not acquired the ability to sustain transmission among humans: there has been limited, non-sustained human-to-human transmission of variant influenza viruses, but ongoing community transmission has not been identified.

The risk of detecting additional human cases associated with this event and further spread of the disease in humans is considered low.  

The risk assessment will be reviewed should further epidemiological or virological information become available.

WHO advice
Surveillance:

This case does not change the current WHO recommendations on public health measures and seasonal influenza surveillance.
WHO does not advise special traveler restrictions or screening at points of entry concerning the current situation of influenza viruses at the human-animal interface.
Due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect virological, epidemiological and clinical changes associated with circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal) health, and timely virus sharing for risk assessment.
Notification and investigation:  

All human infections caused by a novel influenza subtype are notifiable under the International Health Regulations (IHR), and States Parties to the IHR (2005) are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a recent human infection caused by an influenza A virus with the potential to cause a pandemic. Evidence of illness is not required.
In the case of a confirmed or suspected human infection caused by a novel influenza virus with pandemic potential, including a variant virus, a thorough epidemiologic investigation should be conducted, including a history of travel and animal exposure; and contact tracing should be implemented. The epidemiologic investigation should include early identification of unusual respiratory disease events that could signal person-to-person transmission of the novel virus. Clinical samples collected from the time and place of the case should be tested and sent to a WHO Collaborating Centre for further characterization.
Travel and trade:

WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions for Spain based on the currently available information. 
General hygiene measures, such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals as well as avoiding contact with sick animals, should be adhered to.
Prevention measures for travelers:  

Travelers to countries with known outbreaks of animal influenza should avoid farms, contact with animals in live animal markets, entering areas where animals may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with animal feces. Travelers should also wash their hands often with soap and water.
Influenza viruses that infect pigs are different from human influenza viruses. There is no vaccine for zoonotic influenza infection licensed for use in humans. However, the development of influenza candidate vaccine viruses (CVVs) for novel zoonotic influenza, coordinated by WHO, remains an essential component of the overall global strategy for influenza pandemic preparedness. Vaccines against human influenza viruses are generally not expected to protect people from infection with influenza viruses that normally circulate in pigs. Nevertheless, WHO recommends seasonal influenza vaccination to avoid severe illness from infection with circulating influenza viruses.

Situation at a glance
On 30 January 2024, the International Health Regulations National Focal Point (IHR NFP) of Uruguay notified the World Health Organization (WHO) of a human case of western equine encephalitis (WEE) virus infection. The patient is a 42-year-old from a rural area in the Department of San Jose, in southern Uruguay. This is the first confirmed human case reported in Uruguay in more than a decade, since the last reported human cases of WEE occurred in 2009. WEE is a rare mosquito-borne viral disease that affects equines and humans. Most human cases are associated with outbreaks in birds or horses. The virus has the potential to spread through the migration of infected birds or the movement of people and animals carrying the virus. Given that birds act as a reservoir, they can act as amplifying hosts for viral dissemination to other countries. At-risk groups include people who live, work, or participate in outdoor activities in endemic areas or where there are active disease outbreaks in animals. WEE virus vaccines are available for equines. It is advisable to seek high vaccination coverage among susceptible equines in areas considered at risk and to carry out annual vaccination boosters.
Description of the situation
On 30 January 2024, the IHR NFP of Uruguay notified the Pan American Health Organization/World Health Organization (PAHO/WHO) of a confirmed human case of WEE. The case, a 42-year-old person from a rural area in the Department of San Jose, is the first human case of WEE in Uruguay since 2009 (1)(2).

The patient had onset of symptoms in the first days of January 2024, reporting headache, fever, photophobia and vomiting. Later the patient presented with deterioration of consciousness, and medical imaging patterns were compatible with encephalitis, requiring admission to intensive care for a few days. Currently the patient has recovered and has been discharged.   (1)(2).

During the case’s disease evolution, analysis of cerebrospinal fluid was performed according to the protocol and supplies available in the region. The sample was processed by the National Laboratory of the Ministry of Health of Uruguay. Initially a negative result by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was obtained. The patient's evolution required several further lumbar punctures, which were analyzed for the detection of IgM antibodies specific for WEE virus, and on 30 January 2024 a positive result was obtained (1)(2).

Regarding the epidemiological background, the individual resides in a rural area in a department of the country with known WEE viral circulation; this department has the highest incidence of confirmed cases in equines in the country.  According to the epidemiological investigation, the patient had not had direct contact with equines.

Between 5 December 2023 and 30 January 2024, Uruguay’s Ministry of Livestock, Agriculture and Fisheries confirmed 76 equine WEE cases in 16 departments of the country: Artigas, Canelones, Cerro Largo, Durazno, Flores, Lavalleja, Montevideo, Paysandú, Río Negro, Rivera, Rocha, Salto, San José, Soriano, Tacuarembó, and Treinta y Tres. The Department of San Jose recorded the highest proportion of equine cases, accounting for 30% of the confirmed equine cases in the country (3). 

Epidemiology
WEE is a rare mosquito-borne disease caused by a virus of the same name, which belongs to the genus Alphavirus of the Togaviridae family, to which the eastern equine encephalitis (EEE) and Venezuelan equine encephalitis (VEE) viruses also belong. The main reservoir hosts of EEE and WEE viruses are passerine birds. In humans, the WEE virus can cause disease ranging from subclinical or moderate symptoms to severe forms of aseptic meningitis and encephalitis.

The virus has the potential to spread through the migration of infected birds or even through the movement of people and animals carrying the virus. Given that birds act as a reservoir, they can act as amplifying hosts for viral dissemination to other countries. At-risk groups include people who live, work, or participate in outdoor activities in endemic areas or where there are declared active disease outbreaks in animals.

WEE virus mainly circulates in the western regions of Canada and the United States and the southern cone of South America (4). Since late November 2023, a significant number of equine outbreaks have been observed in Uruguay. The last human case of WEE reported in Uruguay was in 2009 (5).  

Public health response
Local and national health authorities have implemented public health measures based on the recently published PAHO/WHO recommendations, with an inter-institutional and comprehensive approach between animal health, human health and environmental health (One Health). This includes strengthening capacity for detection, follow-up and monitoring of laboratory confirmation of suspected cases; risk communication with special emphasis on prevention and control measures at the environmental level; vector control; and personal protection measures (1).

WHO risk assessment
In humans, the WEE virus can cause manifestations ranging from subclinical or moderate symptoms to severe forms of aseptic meningitis and encephalitis. Passerine birds are the main reservoir hosts for EEE and WEE viruses; however, in South America, other mammals, such as rodents and bats, may play a role as significant reservoirs of the virus, while equines and humans serve as terminal hosts (6)(7).

The transmission of the WEE virus primarily occurs through the bite of infected mosquitoes acting as vectors. The main vectors are mosquitoes of the genera Culex, Culiseta and Aedes. These vectors maintain the circulation of the virus in wild enzootic cycles where birds act as the primary reservoirs. In the WEE outbreak in Argentina in 1983, the Aedes albifasciatus has been described as a potential vector of this virus (8). Humans and equines, acting as terminal hosts, do not contribute to the virus’s ongoing transmission to mosquitoes (6). People who work outside or participate in outdoor activities are at greater risk because of mosquito exposure.

Outbreaks of WEE in humans generally present as isolated cases with moderate symptoms; most infections are asymptomatic. Neurological manifestations include meningitis, encephalitis, or myelitis. As with other arboviral encephalitis, the one caused by WEE is characterized by fever, altered mental status, seizures, or focal neurological signs including movement disorders (9). It has been documented that mortality in humans ranges from 3% to 4% (6). There is no specific antiviral treatment, and care measures are supportive.

WHO advice
Below is a summary of the main recommendations for surveillance, prevention measures and risk communication.

Laboratory diagnosis of WEE in humans

The diagnosis of WEE virus infection requires confirmation through laboratory techniques, since the clinical presentation is not specific. These laboratory methods include virological (direct) diagnostic methods by nucleic acid amplification or cell culture; and serological (indirect) methods, aiming to detect antibodies produced against the virus. Generally, samples for diagnosis include serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). CSF should only be collected in cases with neurological symptoms and by clinical indication. Detailed information on laboratory confirmation can be found in the Laboratory Guidelines for the Detection and Diagnosis of Western Equine Encephalitis Virus Human Infection (4). A negative blood PCR should not be used to rule out WEE.

Surveillance

In risk areas with reported active outbreaks in animals, it is recommended to strengthen active human case finding for compatible neurological syndromes without any other defined diagnosis, taking into account the incubation period, geographic area, and environmental conditions.

Prevention Measures

The preventive actions listed below must be organized within the framework of One Health, considering inter-institutional and comprehensive action between animal health, human health, and the environment.

Managing the environment

Considering the ecology and biology of the main vectors of the WEE virus, the main prevention measure is environmental management, seeking to reduce the number of mosquitoes and their contact with equines and humans. These measures include:

Filling or draining water collections, ponds, or temporary flooding sites that may serve as sites of female oviposition and breeding sites for mosquito larvae.
Elimination of weeds around the premises to reduce mosquito resting and shelter sites.
Protection of equines by sheltering them in stables with mosquito nets, particularly at times when mosquitoes are most active.
Although the main vectors do not have indoor habits, it is advisable to protect homes with mosquito nets on doors and windows; in this way, other arboviruses are prevented.

Vector control measures for WEE should be considered within an integrated vector management framework. It is important to consider that the decision to carry out vector control activities with insecticides depends on entomological surveillance data and the variables that may increase the risk of transmission, including insecticide resistance data. Insecticide spraying may be considered an additional measure and, where technically feasible, in areas of transmission where high mosquito populations are detected. The methodology should be established based on the ecology and behavior of local vectors.

Vaccination in equines

Vaccines are available for equines. It is advisable to seek high vaccination coverage among susceptible equines in areas considered at risk and to carry out annual vaccination boosters.
Personal Protective Measures

Use of clothing that covers the legs and arms.
Use of repellents containing Diethyltoluamide (DEET), IR3535 or Icaridin, which may be applied to exposed skin or clothing, and should be used in strict accordance with the instructions on the product label.
Use of wire mesh/mosquito nets on doors and windows.
Use of insecticide-treated or non-insecticide nets for daytime sleepers (e.g., pregnant women, infants, bedridden persons, elderly persons, and night shift workers).
In outbreak situations, outdoor activities should be avoided during the period of greatest mosquito activity (dawn and dusk).
WHO does not recommend any specific measures for travellers. WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions for Uruguay based on the currently available information.

Situation at a glance
Between 26 and 28 January 2024, the Cambodia National Focal Point (NFP) for the International Health Regulations (IHR) notified the World Health Organization (WHO) of two confirmed cases of human infection with avian influenza A(H5N1) virus. These cases were reported from Kampong Trabek district, Prey Veng province, and Puok district, Siem Reap province, Cambodia. These are the first two cases of human infection with influenza A(H5N1) reported in Cambodia in 2024. One case was detected through severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) sentinel surveillance and one by a physician at a non-SARI sentinel site. Both patients had contact with sick poultry. There is no evidence of an epidemiological link between the two cases. In December 2003, Cambodia reported an outbreak of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5N1 for the first time, affecting wild birds. Following this, human cases due to poultry-to-human transmission were reported sporadically until 2014, after which there was a gap until the next cases reported in 2023: two cases each were reported in February, October, and November of 2023. H5N1 infection in humans can cause severe disease, has a high mortality rate, and is notifiable under IHR (2005).
Description of the situation
Between 26 and 28 January 2024, the Cambodia IHR NFP notified WHO of two confirmed cases of human infection with avian influenza A (H5N1) virus. These cases were reported from Kampong Trabek district, Prey Veng province, and Puok district, Siem Reap province, Cambodia. 

The first case, a 3-year-old, was reported on 26 January 2024, from Kampong Trabek district, Prey Veng province. The patient developed symptoms on 13 January 2024 and was admitted to hospital on 16 January 2024 with high fever, cough and runny nose. Samples were collected at the hospital and were transported to the National Institute of Public Health for testing. There, the samples tested positive for H5N1 through quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) on 25 January 2024 and were confirmed by the Institut Pasteur du Cambodge (IPC) on 25 January 2024. The patient had a history of exposure to backyard chickens that were found dead around the residence. A total of 14 close contacts of the case were identified and samples were collected and tested, of which none were positive for influenza. 

The second case, a 69-year-old, was reported on 28 January 2024, from Puok district, Siem Reap province, Cambodia. The patient had pre-existing hypertension and had onset of symptoms on 21 January 2024, including a fever exceeding 38°C, cough, and difficulty breathing. The patient was admitted to the hospital on 23 January 2024 and tested positive for H5N1 through RT-PCR at the National Institute for Public Health on 27 January 2024. The sample was confirmed positive by additional testing at IPC on 28 January 2024. Based on the initial investigation, the patient raised domestic poultry and fighting roosters. Three chickens tested were found to be positive for influenza A(H5N1). No sampling and testing of the environment was done. Four close contacts and 39 additional contacts were identified and tested, of which one was found positive for an unrelated influenza B/Victoria lineage. 

The two confirmed cases of human infection with avian influenza A (H5N1) virus have since recovered. Genome sequencing and phylogenetic analysis revealed that the HA genes of A/H5 isolates in both confirmed cases belong to clade 2.3.2.1c.  

In 2023, six human cases, including four deaths, were reported from Kampot Province (n=2), Prey Veng Province (n=3) and Svay Rieng (n=1). From 2003 through 28 January 2024, a total of 64 cases of human infection with influenza A(H5N1), including 41 deaths, have been reported from Cambodia.  

Epidemiology
Animal influenza viruses normally circulate in animals but can also infect humans. Infections in humans have primarily been acquired through direct contact with infected animals or contaminated environments. Depending on the original host, animal influenza A viruses can be classified as avian influenza, swine influenza, or other types of animal influenza viruses.

Avian, swine, and other animal influenza virus infections in humans may cause disease ranging from mild upper respiratory tract infection to more severe disease and death. Conjunctivitis, gastrointestinal symptoms, encephalitis and encephalopathy have been reported. There have also been several detections of influenza A(H5N1) virus in asymptomatic persons. These detections were made because the individuals had exposure to infected birds as they were involved in poultry farms depopulation/decontamination procedures following reported poultry outbreaks.

Laboratory tests are required to diagnose human infection with influenza. WHO periodically updates technical guidance protocols for the detection of zoonotic influenza using molecular methods, e.g. reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Evidence suggests that some antiviral drugs, notably neuraminidase inhibitors (oseltamivir, zanamivir), can reduce the duration of viral replication and improve prospects of survival in some cases.

Public health response
The Cambodia Ministry of Health's national and sub-national rapid response teams, with support from the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, and the Ministry of Environment, have been actively investigating the avian influenza outbreak in the Prey Veng and Siem Reap Provinces. 

Ongoing efforts involve investigations to find sources and modes of transmission in both animals and humans. Additionally, there is a continuing search for suspected cases and contacts to prevent any possibility of onward transmission. Poultry samples have been collected and testing is ongoing. 

WHO risk assessment
From 2003 to 28 January 2024, 884 human cases of influenza A (H5N1) infection, including 461 deaths, have been reported globally from 23 countries. Almost all cases of human infection with avian influenza A(H5N1) were sporadic infections and have been linked to close contact with infected live or dead birds, or influenza A(H5N1) contaminated environments. These animal influenza viruses do not easily infect humans, and human-to-human transmission appears to be unusual. However, severe disease with high mortality rates can occur as a result of human infection. Given that the virus continues to circulate in poultry, particularly in rural areas in Cambodia and other countries where the virus is endemic in poultry, the potential for further sporadic human cases can be expected. 

Available epidemiological and virological evidence suggests that A(H5N1) viruses have not acquired the ability to sustain transmission among humans. Therefore, the likelihood of human-to-human spread is considered low. Based on available information, WHO assesses the risk to the general population posed by this virus to be low. The risk assessment will be reviewed as needed if additional information becomes available. 

Close analysis of the epidemiological situation, further characterization of the most recent influenza A(H5N1) viruses in both human and poultry populations, and serological investigations, are critical to assess associated risks to public health and promptly adjust risk management measures. 

There are no specific vaccines for influenza A(H5N1) in humans. However, candidate vaccines to prevent influenza A(H5) infection in humans have been developed for pandemic preparedness in some countries. WHO continues to update the list of zoonotic influenza candidate vaccine viruses (CVV) twice a year at the WHO consultation on influenza virus vaccine composition. The list of such CVVs is available on WHO website. In addition, the genetic and antigenic characterizations of contemporary zoonotic influenza viruses are published on  Global Influenza Programme (who.int).

WHO advice
This event does not change the current WHO recommendations on public health measures and influenza surveillance. 

Given reports of sporadic influenza A (H5N1) cases in humans, outbreaks in mammals, the widespread circulation in birds and the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect and monitor virological, epidemiological, and clinical changes associated with emerging or circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal) health, and timely virus sharing for risk assessment.

The public should avoid high-risk environments, such as live animal markets/farms, and avoid contract with live poultry or surfaces that might be contaminated by birds or poultry droppings. Additionally, it is recommended to maintain good hand hygiene with frequent washing or use of alcohol- based hand sanitizer.  

The general public and at-risk individuals should immediately report instances of sick animals or unexpected deaths in animals to veterinary authorities. Consumption of poultry that are sick or have died unexpectedly should be avoided.   

In countries where avian influenza is known to cause outbreaks in poultry, people who handle live poultry for consumption should wear respiratory protection/barriers during slaughtering or when handling slaughtered poultry and should seek health care immediately if they feel unwell soon after such exposure.

Any person who has had exposure to potentially infected birds or contaminated environments and feels unwell should seek health care promptly and inform their healthcare provider of their exposure. 

WHO advises against implementing any travel or trade restrictions based on the current information available on this event. WHO does not advise special traveler screening at points of entry or other restrictions due to the current situation of influenza viruses at the human-animal interface. 

States Parties to the International Health Regulations (2005) are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a recent human infection caused by a new subtype of influenza virus. Evidence of illness is not required for this notification.

Situation at a glance
On 16 January 2024, Brazil notified the World Health Organization (WHO) of a laboratory-confirmed human infection with swine-origin influenza A(H1N1) variant (v) virus, in the municipality of Toledo, State of Paraná. The patient, who had underlying medical conditions, developed symptoms and was hospitalized on 16 December 2023. He had no history of exposure to pigs and has fully recovered. From the epidemiological investigation, no close contacts were identified. This is the first human infection caused by an influenza A(H1N1)v virus reported in Brazil in 2024, and the ninth case of a human infection with a swine variant virus reported in the state of Paraná, Brazil, since 2015. According to the International Health Regulations (IHR) 2005, a human infection caused by a novel influenza A virus subtype is an event that has the potential for high public health impact and must be notified to the WHO. Based on the information currently available, WHO considers this a sporadic case. The likelihood of community-level spread among humans and/or international disease spread through humans is considered low. WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect virological, epidemiological and clinical changes associated with circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal) health, and timely virus sharing for risk assessment.
Description of the situation
On 16 January 2024, the Brazil National Focal Point (NFP) for International Health Regulations (IHR), notified the World Health Organization of a human infection with a swine-origin influenza A(H1N1)v virus.

The patient is an adult male, with underlying medical conditions, who resides in the municipality of Toledo, in the State of Paraná. The man, who lives alone, had no history of exposure to pigs or to any ill individuals. From the epidemiological investigation, no close contacts were identified.

The patient first developed symptoms on 12 December 2023, including fever, headache, fatigue and cough, and sought medical assistance on 16 December 2023, when he was hospitalized. He did not receive antiviral treatment but fully recovered on 18 December 2023, when he was discharged from the hospital.

A sample was sent on 19 December 2023 to the Central Public Health Laboratory of the State of Paraná for analysis of influenza and SARS-CoV-2. The sample was subtyped as influenza A/H1 virus by real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). On 11 January 2024, the sample was sent for confirmation to the National Influenza Center (NIC), National Reference Laboratory for respiratory viruses of FIOCRUZ, Rio de Janeiro, where on 15 January 2024, influenza A (H1N1) variant virus was confirmed. 

According to the sequencing results, the virus shares 99% similarity with the A/Paraná/ 20675/2022 (A/H1N1pdm09-like) virus previously detected in a human case from the city of Toledo-Paraná in October 2022. The segments PB2, PB1, PA, NA, and MP corresponded to the virus A/Paraná/10835/2021 (A/H1N1pdm09-like) also reported in the city of Toledo, and the NP and NS segments corresponded to the virus A/Paraná/44706/2022 (A/H3N2v) reported in the city of Santa Helena, also in the state of Paraná. On 1 February 2024, the NIC sent the sample to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (US CDC) Influenza Division – a WHO Collaborating Centre (CC) for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Control of Influenza – for further characterization.

These laboratory findings might indicate ongoing spread of the virus in the animal population and exposure of the human population in the state of Paraná. Community transmission in humans has not been identified.

Epidemiology
Influenza A(H1) viruses are enzootic in swine populations in most regions of the world. When an influenza virus that normally circulates in swine is detected in a person, it is called a “variant influenza virus”. A(H1N1), A(H1N2) and A(H3N2) are major subtypes of swine influenza A viruses in pigs and occasionally infect humans, usually after direct or indirect exposure of humans to pigs or contaminated environments. Human infections with variant viruses tend to result in mild clinical illness, although some cases have been hospitalized with more severe disease and some have been fatal.

To date, sporadic human infections caused by influenza A(H1N1), A(H1N2), and A(H3N2) variant viruses have been reported in Brazil, but there has been no evidence of sustained human-to-human transmission.

This is the first human infection with an influenza A(H1N1)v virus reported in Brazil in 2024. This case is the fourth human infection with Influenza A(H1N1)v reported in the country and the ninth human case of infection with a swine variant virus reported in the state of Paraná, Brazil, since 2015.

Previously in the state of Paraná, eight human infections with swine variant viruses have been reported, comprising influenza A(H1N1)v (one case each in 2021, 2022 and 2023), influenza A(H1N2)v (one case in 2015, and two cases in 2020) and influenza A(H3N2)v (two cases in 2021). All cases lived in rural areas with pig farms, one lived close to a pig farm, and one worked in a pig slaughterhouse. Among these previous eight cases, one death was recorded.

Public health response
Local and national health authorities have implemented the following public health measures:
Conducting an epidemiological investigation.
Monitoring influenza-like illness (ILI) and severe acute respiratory infections (SARI) in surrounding municipalities within the same health region, seeking to analyze the trends of respiratory viruses in the region, with a focus on influenza.
Laboratory investigation of respiratory samples collected in the municipality of Toledo, from one month before to one month after the onset of symptoms of the current case.
WHO risk assessment
This is the first human infection with an influenza A(H1N1)v virus reported in Brazil in 2024. The patient had no history of exposure to pigs or any ill individuals. Based on currently available information, this represents a sporadic case and further spread has not been detected.

Limited, non-sustained human-to-human transmission of variant influenza viruses has been described, although ongoing community transmission has never been identified. Current evidence suggests that these viruses have not acquired the ability to sustain transmission among humans.

There is no vaccine for Influenza A(H1N1)v infection currently licensed for use in humans. Seasonal influenza vaccines against human influenza viruses are generally not expected to protect people from infection with influenza viruses that normally circulate in pigs, but they can reduce severity.

WHO assesses the risk of international disease spread through humans and/or community-level spread among humans posed by this event as low. The risk assessment will be reviewed should further epidemiological or virological information become available.

WHO advice
Surveillance:

This case does not change the current WHO recommendations on public health measures and surveillance of seasonal influenza.
Due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect virological, epidemiological and clinical changes associated with circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal) health and timely virus sharing for risk assessment.
Continued vigilance is needed within affected and neighbouring areas to detect infections in animals and humans. Collaboration between the animal and human health sectors is essential. As the extent of influenza viruses circulating in animals is unclear, epidemiologic and virologic surveillance and the follow-up of suspected human cases should continue systematically. Guidance on the investigation of non-seasonal influenza and other emerging acute respiratory diseases is available on the WHO website.
Vigilance for the emergence of novel influenza viruses of pandemic potential should be maintained. WHO has developed practical guidance for integrated surveillance in the context of the cocirculation of SARS-CoV-2 and influenza viruses.
It is critical that influenza viruses from animals or from people be fully characterized in appropriate animal or human health influenza reference laboratories. Under WHO’s Pandemic Influenza Preparedness (PIP) Framework, Member States are expected to share influenza viruses with pandemic potential on a regular and timely basis through the Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS).
Notification and investigation:

All human infections caused by a novel influenza subtype are notifiable under the IHR, and States Parties to the IHR are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a recent human infection caused by an influenza A virus with the potential to cause a pandemic. Evidence of illness is not required for this report.
In the case of a confirmed or suspected human infection caused by a novel influenza virus with pandemic potential, including a variant virus, a thorough epidemiologic investigation of history of exposure to animals, of travel, and contact tracing should be conducted. The epidemiologic investigation should include early identification of unusual respiratory disease events that could indicate person-to-person transmission of the novel virus. Clinical samples collected from the time and place that the case occurred should be tested and sent to a WHO Collaborating Centre for further characterization.
Travel and trade:

WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions for Brazil based on available information on this event.
Prevention measures for travelers:

WHO advises that travelers to countries with known outbreaks of animal influenza avoid farms, contact with animals in live animal markets, entering areas where animals may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with animal excreta. Travelers should also wash their hands often with soap and water. All individuals should follow good food safety and hygiene practices.
WHO does not advise special traveler restrictions or screening at points of entry with regard to the current situation of influenza viruses at the human-animal interface.

Situation at a glance
Indonesia reported four cases of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) from October 2022 to February 2023, with three cases occurring in Aceh province and one case in West Java province. On 20 and 27 December 2023, the Indonesian Ministry of Health notified WHO of two new confirmed cases of cVDPV2. One case, from Klaten District, Central Java Province, is a 6-year-old female, with a history of recent travel to Madura Island (Sampang district, East Java Province). The second case, a one-year-old male, is from the neighbouring district of Pamekasan on Madura Island, East Java. Sub-optimal vaccination coverage increases the risk of further transmission and impact on human health. In Klaten district, where the current case is reported, the coverage for four doses of bivalent oral polio vaccine (bOPV) and inactivated polio vaccine 1 (IPV1) was at 89.8% and 88.6% respectively in 2022. In the Pamekasan District, where the second case was reported the coverages for bOPV and IPV1were 88.1% and 74.1%, respectively in 2022. In response to the new cVDPV2 cases detected in Indonesia, several public health responses are underway. As per protocol, detailed case investigation and risk assessment have been conducted. Coordination across country and regional levels with the global polio eradication initiative is ongoing. The overall risk is assessed as high at the national level. At the regional level the overall risk is assessed to be moderate.
Description of the situation
On 20 and 27 December 2023, the Indonesian Ministry of Health notified WHO of two confirmed cases of circulating VDPV2. One case,from Klaten district, Central Java province, is a 6-year-old female, with a history of recent travel to Sampang district, East Java province. She developed acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) on 21 November 2023 and had previously received two doses of bivalent oral polio vaccine (bOPV) through routine immunization. The case had not received any dose of inactivated polio vaccine (IPV). 

The genetic sequencing of isolates at the BioFarma National Polio Laboratory indicates cVDPV2 with 36 nucleotide changes, genetically linked to a case in West Java province, that was reported to WHO in March 2023.

The second case is reported from Pamekasan district in East Java province. The case is a one-year-old male with an onset of paralysis on 22 November 2023 with a history of bOPV vaccination (four doses) and one dose of IPV. The sequence result indicates 43 nucleotide changes with the Sabin 2 references.

Two environmental samples taken in Bangkalan district, East Java province, on 7 December 2023, also tested positive for cVDPV2. Sequence results showed 36 and 37 nucleotide changes.

Prior to these two cases of cVDPV2, in Central Java (1) and East Java (1), four cases of cVDPV2 infection had been reported previously from Indonesia. These four cases were reported, since 2022, in the following locations:

Pidie, Aceh Province in October 2022
Aceh Utara, Aceh Province in January 2023
Bireuen, Aceh Province in January 2023
Purwarkarta, West Java Province in February 2023
In Central Java, the 2022 data indicates over 95% coverage for bOPV4 and IPV1 at the provincial level, in Klaten district, Central Java province, the coverage for the four doses of bOPV and IPV1 was at 89.8% and 88.6% respectively in 2022.  The Pamekasan district reported coverages of 88.1% for bOPV and 74.1% for IPV1, while the Bangkalan district reported 69.9% for bOPV and 53.7% for IPV1.

There are no hard-to-reach areas in the region. However, sociocultural barriers in East Java's Madura community pose challenges to vaccination from vaccine hesitancy due to several reasons including   fear of adverse effects, multiple injections and sometimes due to religious reasons.

Epidemiology
Polio is a highly infectious disease that largely affects children under five years of age, causing permanent paralysis (approximately 1 in 200 infections) or death (2-10% of those paralyzed).

The virus is transmitted from person-to-person, mainly through the fecal-oral route or, less frequently, by contaminated water or food. The virus multiplies in the intestine, from where it can invade the nervous system and cause paralysis. The incubation period is usually 7-10 days but can range from 4-35 days. Up to 90% of those infected are either asymptomatic or experience mild symptoms and the disease usually goes unrecognized.

Vaccine-derived poliovirus is a well-documented strain of poliovirus mutated from the strain originally contained in OPV. OPV contains a live, weakened form of poliovirus that replicates in the intestine for a limited period, thereby developing immunity by building up antibodies. On rare occasions, when replicating in the gastrointestinal tract, OPV strains can genetically change and may spread in communities that are not fully vaccinated against polio, especially in areas where there is poor hygiene, poor sanitation, or overcrowding. The lower the population's immunity, the longer vaccine-derived poliovirus survives and the more genetic changes it undergoes.

In very rare instances, the vaccine-derived virus can genetically change into a form that can cause paralysis as does the wild poliovirus – this is what is known as a vaccine-derived poliovirus (VDPV). The detection of VDPV in at least two different sources and at least two months apart, that are genetically linked, showing evidence of transmission in the community, is classified as ‘circulating’ vaccine-derived poliovirus (cVDPV). Similar to wild poliovirus, cVDPVs can be of three types (1,2 or 3), the current outbreak in Indonesia is due to cVDPV type 2 (cVDPV2).

Public health response
In response to this cVDPV2 outbreak in Indonesia, several public health responses are underway.

As per protocol, detailed case investigation and risk assessment have been undertaken. Active case finding is being conducted in at least 200 households in both the community of the two current cases and neighboring areas. Furthermore, hospital record reviews have been performed and the identification of additional Environmental Surveillance (ES) sites is in process.

Coordination across country and regional levels with the global polio eradication initiative is ongoing. Efforts are ongoing to enhance and catch up on routine immunizations, focusing especially on two doses of IPV. In response to the outbreak, the government had requested the WHO-Director General’s approval for the release of novel oral polio vaccine type 2 (nOPV2). The DG has approved the release of more than 20 million doses of nOPV2 to conduct two rounds of supplementary immunization activities (SIAs) scheduled on 15 January 2024 and 19 February 2024.

Regular situation reports are being published on the WHO website and shared with neighboring countries.

WHO risk assessment
The overall risk is assessed as high at the national level. The country has strong capacity to respond which was demonstrated during the Papua cVDPV1 and Aceh and West Java cVDPV2 outbreaks. However, the population is susceptible to type 2 polioviruses following both the switch from trivalent OPV (tOPV) to bivalent OPV (bOPV), and the sub-optimal IPV vaccination coverage in Central Java, East Java, neighbouring Yogyakarta and several other provinces of Indonesia. Vaccine hesitancy among some populations complicates vaccination activities. There is regular population movement from Central Java, East Java and the neighbouring populous region of Yogyakarta, to other provinces within the country and vice-versa. Central Java and East Java have moderate to strong capacity within existing resources for implementing response measures.

At the regional level the overall risk is assessed to be moderate. Though there is no land-border from Central Java and East Java and limited cross-border population movement from the affected area, the virological analysis indicates that the virus may have been possibly circulating for some time and whole genome sequencing is still pending. This risk will be continuously assessed and will be reviewed according to the evolution of the situation.

WHO advice
It is important that all countries, in particular those with frequent travel connections with polio-affected countries and areas, strengthen surveillance for AFP cases in order to rapidly detect any new virus importation and to facilitate a rapid response. Countries, territories and areas should also maintain uniformly high routine immunization coverage at the district level to minimize the consequences of any new virus introduction.

WHOs International Travel and Health advice recommends that all travellers to polio-affected areas be fully vaccinated against polio.

As per the advice of the Emergency Committee convened under the International Health Regulations (2005), efforts should be made to limit the international spread of poliovirus and countries affected by poliovirus transmission are subject to Temporary Recommendations. To comply with the Temporary Recommendations issued under the PHEIC, any country that have had an importation of cVDPV2 with local transmission should (i) declare the outbreak as a national public health emergency, (ii) encourage residents and long-term visitors to receive a dose of IPV four weeks to 12 months prior to international travel, (iii) ensure that travellers who receive such vaccination have access to an appropriate document to record their polio vaccination status, (iv) further intensify efforts to increase IPV immunization coverage, including sharing coverage data, and (v) intensify regional cooperation and cross border coordination to enhance surveillance for prompt detection of poliovirus, and vaccinate refugees, travellers and cross border populations, according to the advice of the Advisory Group.

The latest epidemiological information on WPVs and cVDPVs is updated on the website of the Global Polio Eradication Initiative a weekly basis.

WHO advises against implementing any travel or trade restrictions based on the current information available on this event.

Situation at a glance
On 20 December, the International Health Regulations National Focal Point (IHR NFP) of Argentina notified the World Health Organization (WHO) of a human case of Western Equine Encephalitis (WEE) infection. This is the first confirmed human case reported after more than two decades, since the last reported human cases in Argentina occurred in 1982/1983 and 1996. WEE is a rare mosquito-borne viral disease that affects equines and humans. Most human cases are associated with epidemics in birds or horses. The virus has the potential to spread to other areas through the migration of infected birds or the movement of people and animals carrying the virus. Given that birds act as a reservoir, they can act as amplifying hosts for viral dissemination to other countries. At-risk groups include people who live, work, or participate in outdoor activities in endemic areas or where there are declared active disease outbreaks in animals.
Description of the situation
On 20 December, the IHR NFP of Argentina notified the WHO of a human case of WEE infection. The patient is an adult from the province of Santa Fe.  This is the first human case of WEE reported after more than two decades, since the last cases reported in humans in Argentina occurred in 1982/1983 (associated with an outbreak in equines) and 1996 (an isolated case based on clinical and serological findings but with no equine cases detected).1
The patient developed symptoms including headache, myalgia, dizziness, disorientation, and sudden-onset fever on 19 November 2023. On 24 November 2023, the patient received medical attention and was hospitalized in a health facility in the province, where he required intensive care and mechanical ventilation for 12 days. The patient was discharged on 20 December and is undergoing outpatient monitoring.1 Regarding the exposure history, according to information from the epidemiological investigation, the patient is a rural worker in an area where equines that tested positive for WEE infection had previously been identified.1

Patient samples were collected on 24 November 2023, at a hospital in the province, and, on 4 December 2023, were sent to the Reference Laboratory of the National Institute of Human Viral Diseases "Dr. Julio I. Maiztegui" (INEVH per its acronym in Spanish), which is part of the National Institute of Infectious Diseases (ANLIS Malbrán). The samples tested positive on 19 December 2023 for the detection of specific neutralizing antibodies for the WEE virus. The samples also tested negative for other alphaviruses: Eastern Equine Encephalitis (EEE) virus, Venezuelan Equine Encephalitis (VEE) virus, Una virus, Mayaro virus, and Chikungunya virus. 

Epidemiology
WEE is a rare mosquito-borne disease caused by a virus of the same name, which belongs to the genus Alphavirus of the Togaviridae family, to which the EEE and VEE viruses also belong. The main reservoir hosts of EEE and WEE viruses are passerine birds.2 In humans, the WEE virus can cause disease ranging from subclinical or moderate symptoms to severe forms of aseptic meningitis and encephalitis.

The virus has the potential to spread to other areas through the migration of infected birds or even through the movement of people and animals carrying the virus. Given that birds act as a reservoir, they can act as amplifying hosts for viral dissemination to other countries. At-risk groups include people who live, work, or participate in outdoor activities in endemic areas or where there are declared active disease outbreaks in animals.

In Argentina, between 25 November and 27 December of 2023, a total of 1182 outbreaks of WEE disease have been identified in equines in 12 provinces of the country: Buenos Aires (n = 717), Santa Fe (n = 149), Córdoba (n = 141), Entre Ríos (n = 69), Corrientes (n = 41), Chaco (n = 19), La Pampa (n = 18), Río Negro (n = 11), Formosa (n = 8), Santiago del Estero (n = 6), San Luis (n = 2), and Salta (n = 1).3

Public health response
Following the detection of the WEE virus in equines, the Ministry of Health activated a nationwide epidemiological alert, on 28 November 2023, to provide further information on the disease outbreaks in equines and to strengthen epidemiological surveillance of possible human cases.  The epidemiological surveillance includes both passive and active case finding, the latter in areas with active disease outbreaks in animals, according to the case definitions established in the Circular for the epidemiological and laboratory surveillance, prevention and control of Western Equine Encephalitis in Argentina.4

Argentina's national Ministry of Health is also working together with the National Food Safety and Quality Service (SENASA per its acronym in Spanish) and the Ministries of Health of the Province of Santa Fe and of other affected provinces, on the implementation of preventive measures, epidemiological surveillance and outbreak control actions.1 

WHO risk assessment
The primary mode of WEE virus transmission is through the bites of infected mosquitoes, which act as vectors. The principal vector is Culex tarsalis; however, there are multiple vectors that contribute to transmission, including Aedes melanimon, Aedes dorsalis, and Aedes campestris. These vectors maintain the circulation of the virus in wild enzootic cycles where birds act as reservoirs of the virus. Humans and equines act as the final reservoirs of the virus, incapable of transmitting the virus to mosquitoes.5 People engaged in outside work or activities are at greater risk because of exposure to mosquitoes.

Outbreaks of WEE in humans generally present as isolated cases with moderate symptoms and most infections are asymptomatic. Neurological manifestations include meningitis, encephalitis, or myelitis. Similar to other arboviral encephalitis, the encephalitis caused by WEE is characterized by fever accompanied by altered mental status, seizures, or focal neurological signs including movement disorders.6 There is no specific antiviral treatment and patient management primarily involves supportive care measures. 

WHO advice
Below is a summary of the main recommendations for laboratory diagnosis in humans, surveillance, and prevention measures.

Laboratory diagnosis of WEE in humans


The diagnosis of WEE infection requires confirmation through laboratory techniques since the clinical presentation is not specific. These laboratory methods include virological (direct) diagnostic methods by nucleic acid amplification or potentially cell culture and serological (indirect) methods, aiming to detect antibodies produced against the virus. Generally, samples for diagnosis include serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). CSF should only be collected in cases with neurological symptoms and by clinical indication. The diagnostic methods are described in more detail in the Laboratory Guidelines for the Detection and Diagnosis of Western Equine Encephalitis Virus Human Infection.7

Surveillance


In at-risk areas with reported active outbreaks in animals, strengthening surveillance is recommended with active human case finding for compatible neurological syndromes without any other defined diagnosis, taking into account the incubation period, geographic area, and environmental conditions.

Prevention Measures


Preventive actions, listed below, must be organized within the framework of One Health, considering the inter-institutional and comprehensive action between animal health, human health, and the environment.

Managing the environment

Considering the ecology and biology of the main vectors of the WEE virus, the main prevention measures recommended are modifying the environment and environmental management to reduce the number of mosquitoes and their contact with equines and humans. These measures include:

Filling or draining water collections, ponds, or temporary flooding sites that may serve as sites of female oviposition and breeding sites for mosquito larvae.
Elimination of weeds around premises to reduce mosquito resting and shelter sites.
Protecting equines by sheltering them in stables with mosquito nets, particularly at times when mosquitoes are most active.
Although the main vectors do not have indoor habits, it is advisable to protect homes with mosquito nets on doors and windows; in this way, other arboviruses are also prevented.
Vector Control

Vector control measures for the WEE virus should be considered within the Integrated Vector Management (IVM) framework. It is important to consider that the decision to carry out vector control activities with insecticides depends on entomological surveillance data and the variables that may increase in the risk of transmission, including insecticide resistance data. Insecticide spraying may be considered as an additional measure, where technically feasible, in areas of transmission where high mosquito populations are detected. The methodology should be established based on the ecology and behavior of local vectors.

Vaccination in equines

Vaccines are available for equines. It is advisable to seek high vaccination coverage among susceptible equines in areas considered at risk and to carry out annual vaccination boosters.

Personal Protective Measures

Use of clothing that covers the legs and arms, especially in households where someone is ill.
Use of repellents containing DEET, IR3535 or Icaridin, which may be applied to exposed skin or clothing, in strict accordance with the instructions on the product label.
Use wire mesh/mosquito nets on doors and windows.
Use of insecticide-treated or non-insecticide nets for daytime sleepers (e.g. pregnant women, infants, bedridden people, the elderly, and night shift workers).
In outbreak situations, outdoor activities should be avoided during the period of greatest mosquito activity (dawn and dusk).



Description of the situation
Global Overview 

Current situation 

The global incidence of dengue has markedly increased over the past two decades, posing a substantial public health challenge. From 2000 to 2019, the World Health Organization (WHO) documented a ten-fold surge in reported cases worldwide increasing from 500 000 to 5.2 million. The year 2019 marked an unprecedented peak, with reported instances spreading across 129 countries.  

After a slight decline of cases between the year 2020-2022 due to the COVID-19 pandemic and lower reporting rate, in 2023, an upsurge in dengue cases have been observed globally, characterized by a significant increase in the number, scale, and simultaneous occurrence of multiple outbreaks, spreading into regions previously unaffected by dengue. 

Dengue transmission is cyclic and large outbreaks every 3-4 years can be expected. During the COVID-19 pandemic we saw moderate transmission of dengue in some regions and low transmission in others leading to an accumulation of people without immunity to certain dengue virus serotypes. However, the data on the circulating dengue serotypes is limited.  

Since the beginning of 2023, ongoing transmission, combined with an unexpected spike in dengue cases have resulted in close to a historic high of over five million cases and more than 5000 dengue-related deaths reported in over 80 countries/territories and five WHO regions: Africa, Americas, South-East Asia, Western Pacific and Eastern Mediterranean Regions globally (Figure 1). Close to 80% of these cases, or 4.1 million, have been reported in the Region of the Americas. Dengue is the most widespread arbovirus and causes the highest number of arboviral disease cases in the Region of the Americas, with cyclic epidemics recurring every 3 to 5 years. In addition, clusters of autochthonous dengue have been reported in the WHO European Region. However, these numbers are likely an underestimate of the true burden as most of the primary infections are asymptomatic and dengue reporting is not mandatory in many countries.     

Several factors are associated with the increasing risk of spread of the dengue epidemic including, the changing distribution of the vectors (chiefly Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus), especially in previously dengue naïve countries; the consequences of El Nino phenomena in 2023 and climate change leading to increasing temperatures and high rainfall, humidity among others; fragile health systems in the midst of COVID-19 pandemic, political and financial instabilities in countries facing complex humanitarian crises and high population movements. These factors also challenge the response to the epidemic and the risk of further spread to other countries. Weakness in the surveillance systems in many affected countries may have led to delayed reporting and response and missed identification of symptoms, contributing to increased severe dengue outcomes. 

WHO has assessed the risk to be high globally considering the increasing risk of transmission and the upsurge of cases and deaths.  

Figure 1: Countries/territories/areas reporting autochthonous dengue cases (November 2022- November 2023) *



* Based on most recent available data (the data should be interpreted considering the differences in reporting rates and case definitions between the regions).

Regional overview 

WHO Region of Africa: 

Africa is among the top four regions most affected by arboviral diseases, including yellow fever, dengue, chikungunya, O'nyong nyong, Rift Valley fever, and Zika. In 2023, 171 991 dengue cases have been reported in countries in the region and 753 deaths. Evidence of dengue circulation has been detected in local populations and/or among travelers returning from more than 30 African countries.  

Outbreaks have been reported from 15 of the 47 countries including Benin, Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, Chad, Côte d'Ivoire, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Mali, Mauritius, Niger, Nigeria, São Tomé and Principe, Senegal and Togo. The outbreaks in most of these countries began in 2023, except in São Tomé and Príncipe, where it was a continuation of an outbreak that started in April 2022. As of 19 December 2023, outbreaks are still ongoing in 11 countries and were declared over in Chad, Guinea, Mauritius, and São Tomé and Príncipe. 

The most affected country in the region in 2023 is Burkina Faso, experiencing a significant increase in dengue cases compared with the same periods in 2021 and 2022. As of 18 December, the cumulative number of cases reported in the country for 2023 is 146 878 suspected cases, including 68 346 probable cases (positive rapid diagnostic test) and 688 deaths among suspected cases, representing a case fatality rate of 0.5%.   

The burden of dengue in Africa is not well understood due to i) similarity of common, non-specific clinical symptoms of the disease with malaria and other tropical febrile illnesses; ii) limited laboratory capacity for timely detection and confirmation of dengue, which is crucial for detecting and reporting cases and preventing its spread; and iii) inadequate surveillance and limited case reporting, especially for dengue. 

Efforts are ongoing to better understand the transmission dynamics of dengue and other arboviruses in the region.  The WHO Regional Office for Africa has endorsed the Framework for the integrated control, elimination and eradication of tropical and vector-borne diseases in the African Region 2022-2030. Equally, the Regional Office has also drafted the Framework for implementation of the Global Arbovirus Initiative by targeted Member States in the WHO African Region. 

WHO Region of the Americas:

Between 1 January 2023 and 11 December 2023, a total of 4.1 million suspected dengue cases (cumulative incidence of 419 cases per 100 000 population), including 6710 severe cases (0.16% of suspected cases) and 2049 deaths (CFR 0.05%) were reported from 42 countries and territories in the Region of the Americas, with 15 countries reporting active outbreak. Of the total number of dengue cases until 12 November 2023 (EW 48 of 2023), 1 895 122 (45%) were laboratory confirmed. 

Currently, 46 countries and territories systematically report, through the Health Information Platform for the Americas (PLISA), on a weekly basis, the total number of cases, incidence, number of severe cases, number of deaths and lethality due to dengue, as well as entomological surveillance data. As of EW 48, Brazil has reported the highest number of suspected cases in the Region (n = 2 909 404; 1359 cases per 100 000 population), followed by Peru (n= 271 279; 813 cases per 100 000 population), and Mexico (n = 235 616; 179 cases per 100 000 population). In terms of severe dengue, Colombia reported the most cases (1504; 1.35% of cases), followed by Brazil (1474; 0.05% of cases), Mexico (1272; 0.54% of cases), Peru (1065; 0.39% of cases), and Bolivia (640; 0.44% of cases).   

Although dengue is endemic in most countries of South America, Mexico and Central America, and the Caribbean countries, the second half of 2023 has witnessed an alarming increase in cases, with cumulative cases for the year surpassing all previous yearly totals and in some countries extending beyond historically affected areas of transmission. Dengue cases have increased in the Americas over the past four decades, from 1.5 million cases from 1980 to 1989 to 17.5 million in 2010-2019. Before 2023, the highest historical dengue caseload was in 2019, with over 3.18 million cases, 28 208 severe cases, and 1823 deaths (CFR 0.06).  

DENV is the most widespread arbovirus and causes the highest number of arboviral disease cases in the Region of the Americas, with cyclic epidemics recurring every 3 to 5 years. Approximately 500 million people in the region are at risk of dengue infection today. Ae. aegypti, the vector mosquito for dengue, is widely distributed in the Americas, only Canada is free from dengue and its vector. In Uruguay, where Ae. Aegypti is present, limited autochthonous transmission was last reported in 2016, and only imported cases have been reported since then. 

All four DENV serotypes (DENV-1, DENV-2, DENV-3 and DENV-4) are currently circulating in the Americas. DENV-3 and DENV-4 are being detected more frequently in 2023 after several years of predominant detection of DENV-1 and DENV-2. Nevertheless, nine countries are reporting the co-circulation of all four dengue serotypes. Simultaneous circulation of all these serotypes has been detected in Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, and Venezuela. The Arbovirus Diagnosis Laboratory Network of the Americas (RELDA as per its acronym in Spanish) has been strengthened to face the introduction of new dengue serotypes and the re-emergence of other arboviral diseases, such as chikungunya, Zika, and West Nile virus, all of which are currently circulating in the region alongside dengue. The main objective of the network is to ensure efficient laboratory surveillance and robust installed capacity to respond to outbreaks and epidemics. 

WHO Eastern Mediterranean Region: 

Dengue and severe dengue epidemics were first reported in the Region in 1998, and since then, their frequency and geographical spread have increased, with outbreaks occurring in all nine endemic countries: Afghanistan, Djibouti, Egypt, Oman, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, and Yemen.  

Among these are fragile, conflict affected and vulnerable countries such as Afghanistan, Pakistan, Sudan, Somalia and Yemen. The outbreaks are exacerbated due to disruption of health services (Sudan), fragile health systems (Afghanistan, Somalia, Sudan, Pakistan and Yemen), mass population movements, poor water and sanitation infrastructure, and recurring natural disasters such as floods affecting Somalia, Sudan, Pakistan, and Yemen, along with earthquakes in Afghanistan. Outbreaks are also reported in middle- and high-income countries such as Egypt, Oman and Saudi Arabia due to climate change leading to unusual rainfalls. Pakistan (n= 20 072), Saudi Arabia and Oman have reported the highest number of confirmed cases thus far in 2023.   

During these epidemics, all four serotypes of dengue virus were known to circulate in the Region. Ae. aegypti is the predominant and primary vector transmitting dengue in the EMR endemic countries. More recently, Bahrain, Iran, and Qatar have reported the presence of Ae. aegypti, although no local transmission of dengue has been documented. Additionally, presence of the secondary vector of dengue, Ae. albopictus, has also been reported from ten EMR countries (Afghanistan, Iran, Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco, Oman, Pakistan, Palestine, Syria and Tunisia).   

The effectiveness of response measures is hindered by several factors including i) constrained laboratory capacities ii) challenges in accessing healthcare iii) shortages of human resources iv) limited and inconsistent vector surveillance v) insecticide resistance, vi) poor community engagement and health education vii) a fragmented surveillance system. vii) The ongoing armed hostilities in many Eastern Mediterranean Region countries further compound the complexities of response efforts. 

WHO European Region:  

Dengue is not endemic in the WHO European Region and cases are mainly travel-related; however, since 2010, there have been reports of autochthonous cases in a number of countries in the region, including Croatia, France, Israel, Italy, Portugal and Spain. In 2018, the year with the most comprehensive data available, a total of 2500 cases of dengue were reported to WHO through the regional annual surveillance data collection mechanism with Germany, France, and the United Kingdom contributing the majority of cases. The vast majority of these cases were imported. However, it should be noted that data completeness remains challenging.     

Between 1 January and 5 December 2023, sporadic autochthonous cases and outbreaks have been reported in three countries: Italy (n = 82), France (n = 43) and Spain (n = 3). Routine testing for dengue in Member States of the WHO European Region is not common unless there is a travel history and clinical suspicion, hence the actual numbers of dengue cases in 2023 is likely to be underestimated. One death of an imported, travel-related case was reported in Italy; no additional deaths have been reported in European countries in 2023 to date.  

The Ae. albopictus mosquito, which is the main vector of dengue virus in Europe, is established in several Southern European countries. Ae. albopictus mosquitoes have been detected further north and west in the past ten years and it has capacity to hibernate in winter. In 2023, this mosquito species has been identified in 13 countries of the region, a notable increase from eight countries in 2013. 

While cold winters prevent year-round transmission of mosquito-borne diseases, the climatic suitability for transmission of DENV in Europe is increasing, leading to floods and stagnant water pools. These create more favorable conditions for the competent vector population.  Ae. aegypti (principal dengue vector in most countries) does not survive over winter well but has been established in Cyprus and Madeira, Portugal since 2022. 

These trends can potentially lead to an increase in the number of dengue cases and possible fatalities. 

Robust public health systems in many countries, including access to early diagnosis, case referral, and management of severe cases, contribute to reduced severe health impact and further disease spread for both imported and autochthonous cases.    

WHO South-East Asia Region:  

In the WHO Southeast Asia region, 10 out of 11 Member States are known to be endemic for dengue virus. In 2023, several countries, including Bangladesh and Thailand, have reported a notable surge in dengue cases compared to previous years. In particular, India, Indonesia, Myanmar, Sri Lanka and Thailand rank among the world's 30 most highly endemic countries.  

Compared to 2022, in 2023, Bangladesh and Thailand recorded a larger number of dengue cases . By November 2023, Bangladesh experienced a substantial rise in cases reaching 308 167 compared to 62 382 reported for the entirety of 2022. Thailand saw an increase of over 300%, with dengue cases rising from 46 678 in 2022 to 136 655 in 2023 (as of 22 November 2023). During the same period, the death toll in Bangladesh rose from 281 (CFR 0.45%) to 1598 (CFR 0.52%), while in Thailand, it increased from 34 (CFR 0.07%) to 147 (CFR 0.11%). In other countries, the CFR ranged from 0.04% in Nepal to 0.72% in Indonesia. It's important to interpret these values cautiously due to variations in the case definition used across countries, with some systems primarily focused on reporting hospitalized or severe dengue cases. 

In addition, spatial and temporal shifts in dengue patterns were observed in 2022 and continued in 2023. Nepal and Bangladesh experienced spikes in case numbers earlier than usual. Cases in Nepal shifted from the Kathmandu Valley in 2022 to the southeast Terai region and hill districts in Gandaki province in 2023. India, in 2023, experienced an increase in cases in Kerala and northeastern States bordering Bangladesh compared to the previous year. 

WHO Western Pacific Region: 

The Western Pacific Region continues to face a high burden of mosquito-borne arboviral diseases, particularly dengue. These diseases cause significant morbidity and mortality, especially among those unreached by quality primary health care (PHC) services.  

Between 1 January 2023 to 7 December 2023, over 500 000 dengue cases and 750 deaths were reported from eight countries/territories/areas in the WHO Western Pacific Region: Australia, Cambodia, China, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, and Viet Nam. The most affected countries are the Philippines, reporting 167 355 cases and 575 deaths (CFR 0.34%), and Viet Nam with 149 557 cases and 36 deaths (CFR: 0.02%). Dengue is endemic in several countries such as Cambodia, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, the Philippines, and Viet Nam.   

In Pacific Island countries/territories (n = 21), in 2023, dengue-like illness1 was reported from nine Pacific countries/territories, resulting in a total of 13 339 cases, a 28% increase reported as of 30 November compared to 2022. Among the most affected are Fiji, which reported 8418 cases in 2022 and 11 522 cases and 2023, reflecting a 37% increase.   

Member States with endemic transmission continue to report longer seasonal dengue epidemics with increasing magnitude and geographic spread. However, disease incidence is less reliable due to the underreporting of cases, particularly in the Pacific Island Countries and territories based on their current syndromic surveillance of dengue as dengue-like illness (DLI) reporting system. Furthermore, the reported number of deaths due to severe dengue is variable. As such, country-level and sub-national case fatality rates (CFR) may appear inconsistent.   

Due to the endemicity of dengue and public health burden in the Western Pacific Region, in 2008, the Regional Committee for WPR endorsed the Dengue Strategic Plan for the Asia Pacific Region 2008-2015 (resolution WPR/RC59.R6), serving as a road map. Subsequently, in 2016, considering the growing regional trends in dengue morbidity and mortality, the Western Pacific Regional Action Plan for Dengue Prevention and Control was developed. This plan recommended a switch in strategy from outbreak containment to reducing the impact of dengue on communities.  There is a window of opportunity for Pacific countries/territories to improve the adherence to the existing WHO “Framework for National Surveillance and control plans for Aedes vectors” in the Pacific for non-endemic countries in the Pacific Region. Given the impact of climate change on the spread and endemicities of Arboviral diseases, establishing a comprehensive Early Warning System (EWS) that integrates climate, disease, viral/ serological, and entomology surveillance is crucial. Such a system has the potential to predict future risks in vulnerable communities.  

Epidemiology
Dengue virus (DENV) is transmitted to humans through the bite of infected mosquitoes typically in tropical and sub-tropical climates worldwide, mostly in urban and semi-urban areas. The primary vectors that transmit the disease are Aedes aegypti and, to a lesser extent, Aedes albopictus mosquitoes, though in some regions such as Europe and North America this latter vector is more widespread.  

DENV has four serotypes (DENV-1, DENV-2, DENV-3, DENV-4). Infection with one serotype provides long-term immunity to the same serotype and only transient immunity to the other serotypes, after which secondary infections with a different serotype increase the risk for severe dengue. Dengue cases are most commonly asymptomatic or result in mild febrile illness. However, some cases will develop severe dengue, which may involve shock, severe bleeding or severe organ impairment. This stage often starts after the fever has gone away and it is preceded by warning signs such as intense abdominal pain, persistent vomiting, bleeding gums, fluid accumulation, lethargy or restlessness, and liver enlargement.   

There is no specific treatment for dengue, but the timely diagnosis of dengue cases, identification of warning signs for severe dengue, and appropriate clinical management are key elements of care to prevent the progression to severe dengue and deaths.  

Public health response
Heterogeneity in capacity across Member States impacts the ability to detect and respond to DENV endemic and epidemic transmission. While the majority of the countries in the Americas, South-East Asian and Western-Pacific regions are endemic for the disease and have the capacity to manage cases, a few countries do not mandate reporting of dengue cases and thus under- or non-reporting of cases results in pockets of vulnerability within regions. Simultaneous outbreaks across multiple WHO regions strain the capacity for epidemic response. The overall capacity to respond to multiple, concurrent outbreaks continues to be strained due to the global lack of resources, including shortages of good quality dengue diagnostic kits for early detection, lack of trained clinical and vector control staff, and lack of resources to support risk community and community engagement interventions. Prevention and control of dengue continue to be variable due to changes in the predominant circulating serotypes and co-circulation of multiple dengue serotypes in the different regions, limited funding, competing health priorities and diverse perceptions about the effectiveness of interventions and control measures. Surveillance and response capacity is particularly limited in many countries in the African region, and as stated earlier, five of the Eastern Mediterranean Member States with DENV are dealing with conflicts and natural disasters.  

There is a pressing need to increase advocacy and resource mobilization in an integrated approach to influence policymakers in affected countries within these regions.  

The following activities are being undertaken at WHO to support Member States in the response to this event.  

Coordination and leadership 

Establishment of a Global Joint Incident Management Support Team (IMST) at WHO, involving WHO Health Emergencies Programme (Response and Preparedness departments) and technical expertise from the Neglected Tropical Disease department to support the response to outbreaks. 
Implementation of integrated response aligned with the overarching Global Arbovirus Initiative.   The Global Arbovirus Initiative is an integrated strategic plan to tackle emerging and re-emerging arboviruses with epidemic and pandemic potential focusing on monitoring risk, pandemic prevention, preparedness, detection and response, and building a coalition of partners. The initiative is a collaborative effort between the World Health Emergencies Programme, the Department of Control of Neglected Tropical Diseases, and the Immunization, Vaccines and Biologicals Department. This integrated initiative will build a coalition of key partners to strengthen the coordination, communication, capacity-building, research, preparedness, and response necessary to mitigate the growing risk of epidemics due to these diseases. 
Preparedness and Response

Conducting risk mapping to categorize countries  (preparedness, readiness or response) and to enable appropriate packages of interventions to be developed. 
Developing global operational response plan and a strategic plan for preparedness and response including needs and required funds. 
Supporting Member States through the development of guidelines on preparedness and response to dengue outbreaks (including the strengthening of epidemiological and entomological surveillance, laboratory diagnosis and genomic surveillance, clinical management, risk communication and community engagement (RCCE), vector surveillance and control, and also organization of health services).   
Provision of technical support to all ongoing outbreaks (epidemiology, laboratory, case management, RCCE including behavioral science, and vector and environmental surveillance and control.  
3.Multisectoral collaboration 

Support country adoption of a multisectoral One health strategy while preparing for and responding to dengue outbreaks as well as other arboviral diseases.  
Collaboration with One Health and climate change partners to coordinate the multisectoral response to dengue outbreaks.
Supporting the deployment of experts through GOARN and Standby Partners to countries that are experiencing high-magnitude outbreaks.     
Vector control activities 

Supporting the implementation of effective integrated vector management (surveillance and control) by Member States (in priority countries) through publishing guidelines and the provision of epidemiological surveillance materials and technical assistance to national authorities.
Working with Member States to support the vector control response with specialized vector control technicians to help coordinate the response.
Support training on insecticide resistance management and vector surveillance in Member States. 
Laboratory

Support the strengthening of laboratory-capacity to enable timely and accurate diagnosis and case detection in affected and at-risk countries.  
Leveraging the capacities built during the COVID-19 pandemic to strengthen molecular diagnosis and genomic surveillance at the country level.  
6. Operations, Support and Logistics (OSL) 

Working closely with suppliers to secure dengue kits and establishing a pipeline for bulk items.
Supporting Member States in purchasing equipment and insecticides and provision of insecticide resistance management kits.  
Case management guidelines and capacity building 

Sharing case management guidelines and clinical training with health care workers through webinars and refresher sessions.   
Ongoing development of the WHO guideline for the clinical management and diagnosis of dengue, chikungunya, Zika, and yellow fever, due for completion in early 2024, which will be an important tool.  
WHO/PAHO has produced a 20-hour self-learning, virtual course on dengue clinical management, available in Spanish and English languages, focused on identifying early predictors of severe disease (warning signs) and preventing the progression of dengue cases to severe dengue and deaths. The course has already trained over 312 000 clinicians since its launch in September 2020 (219 000 in 2023 alone).    
Epidemiological Surveillance 

Virtual cooperation spaces (VCS) have been created for collaborative surveillance between PAHO and its Member States that allow the automated generation of different epidemiological analyses, situation rooms, and epidemiological bulletins, strengthening the epidemiological surveillance of dengue and other arboviruses.  
In 2023, PAHO/WHO issued five updates on the dengue situation in the Region of the Americas and an epidemiological alert regarding the increase in dengue cases in Central America and the Caribbean.  
The WHO Regional Office for Africa has developed a country risk classification tool for dengue, which is being adapted for use in other regions.  
WHO is working globally to enhance surveillance for dengue cases, severe dengue, and dengue deaths, in order to better understand the global burden in a more timely manner.   
Risk communication and community engagement (RCCE) 

Providing advice on risk assessment, including community centered approach. 
Supporting the development of RCCE evidence based and tailored interventions, encouraging both Individual and community actions. 
Reviewing existing RCCE materials and lessons learned from previous and ongoing outbreaks.  
Finalizing the RCCE toolkit on dengue.
WHO risk assessment
Recent data from 2023 emphasize escalated dengue outbreaks in several countries, particularly Bangladesh, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Fiji, Pakistan, the Philippines, and Viet Nam. Additionally, non-endemic countries are increasingly facing dengue as a significant public health concern. The emergence and re-emergence of dengue and its unprecedented worldwide spread are linked to various factors:  i) Changing distribution and adaptation of the Aedes aegypti vector; ii) increased unplanned urbanization and human activities fostering conducive environments for vector-host interaction; iii) Climate change-induced shifts in weather patterns; iv) Fragile healthcare systems amidst political and financial instabilities; v) Co-circulation of multiple dengue serotypes; vi) Challenges in clinical diagnosis due to non-specific symptoms; vii) Inadequate laboratory and testing capacity; viii) Prolonged ongoing concurrent outbreaks, including COVID-19; ix) Lack of specific treatment for dengue; x) Limited behavioral data available on community risk perceptions, awareness and health seeking behaviors: xi) Lack of community centered approach and RCCE resources to support engagement and mobilization of local communities in vector control activities; xi) Insufficient vector surveillance and control capacities and, xii) Lack of coordination among stakeholders, chronic underfunding,  low donor interest and xii) large scale movement of people and goods.   

The expansion of DENV beyond its endemic transmission areas presents additional challenges.  A significant population that is immunologically naïve to the current virus circulating, increasing the risk of outbreaks. Moreover, people in these areas might lack awareness of dengue warning signs, leading to potential delays in seeking health care which is critical to reducing mortality from severe disease.  Accessibility challenges to medical facilities, compounded by limited geographical access, heighten the difficulty in accessing basic healthcare services.  These challenges are aggravated by stockouts of essential supplies for prevention and control, laboratory diagnostic reagents, and the need for ongoing training of healthcare workers.  

These factors, along with others, including financial crises, mass migration of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees, and longstanding developmental inadequacies, have deprived large populations across all continents of adequate healthcare, consequently increasing their vulnerability to dengue. However, it is important to note that the distribution of dengue risk varies significantly across regions, countries, and within countries.   

Based on all the above WHO has assessed the risk at global level as high. Following the risk assessment and an internal grading process, WHO Regional Offices have agreed on priority interventions to implement in support of Member States. 

Dengue prevention and outbreak response involves several agencies in the public health sector. Addressing these challenges requires a multidisciplinary and multisectoral integrated approach, especially at national level to achieve its goal of reducing the impact on public health. The strain on epidemic response capacity due to simultaneous concurrent outbreaks coupled with political crises highlights the need for robust emergency response mechanisms and strengthened collaboration among stakeholders. The global lack of resources, including shortages of good quality dengue diagnostic kits for early detection, lack of trained clinical and vector control personnel, and community awareness remain a critical obstacle to an effective response. While coordination efforts with global health organizations like WHO and other partners strive to set common priorities and analyses, the need for continuous support to affected countries and enhanced collaboration is imperative.  

WHO advice
Effective vector control measures: 

Effective vector control is key to the prevention and control of the DENV. Vector control activities should target all areas where there is a risk of human-vector contact, such as residences, workplaces, schools, and hospitals. WHO promotes Integrated Vector Management (IVM) to control Aedes species. IVM should include removing potential breeding sites, reducing vector populations, and minimizing individual exposure. This should involve vector control strategies for larvae and adults (i.e., environmental management and source reduction), especially monitoring water storage practices, draining and cleaning household water storage containers weekly, larvicide in non-potable water using WHO-prequalified larvicides at correct dosages, distribution of insecticide-treated nets (ITNs) for fever/dengue inpatients to contain spread of the virus from health facilities. Indoor space spraying for rapidly containing dengue-infected mosquitoes may be challenging to deliver in densely populated areas.   

The Global Arbovirus Initiative promotes coordination and collaboration among multisectoral partners, an integrated vector management approach and sustained control measures at all levels. Its guiding principle is to harmonize prevention, surveillance (entomological and epidemiological) and case management with existing health systems, such that they are sustainable, cost-effective and ecologically sound.  

Personal Protective Measures:  

Personal protective measures during outdoor activities include topical repellents to exposed skin or the treatment of clothing and using long-sleeved shirts and pants. Additionally, indoor protection can include the use of household insecticide aerosol products, or mosquito coils during the day. Window and door screens can reduce the probability of mosquitoes entering the house. Insecticide-treated nets offer good protection to people against mosquito bites while sleeping during the day. Since Aedes mosquitoes are most active at dawn and dusk, personal protective measures are recommended particularly at these times of day. Personal protection measures and mosquito control should also cover workplaces and schools since the vectors are day-biting mosquitoes.  

Entomological Surveillance: 

Entomological surveillance should be undertaken to assess the breeding potential of Aedes mosquitoes in containers and monitor insecticide resistance to help select the most effective insecticide-based interventions.  

Case management: 

There is no specific treatment for dengue infection. However, early detection and access to appropriate healthcare for case management can reduce mortality, as can rapid detection of severe dengue cases and timely referrals to tertiary healthcare facilities.   

Most people with dengue have mild or no symptoms and will get better in 1–2 weeks.  

Individuals who are infected for the second time are at greater risk of severe dengue. Severe dengue symptoms often come after the fever has gone away such as: 

severe abdominal pain 
persistent vomiting 
rapid breathing
bleeding gums or nose  
fatigue
restlessness
blood in vomit or stool
being very thirsty
pale and cold skin
feeling weak.
People with these severe symptoms should get care right away. 

Enhanced case surveillance: 

Case surveillance should be enhanced in all affected countries and globally. Where feasible, resources should be allocated for the strengthening of surveillance to determine the overall dengue burden (i.e., including outpatient cases), counting severe and fatal cases, and for the confirmation and sub-typing of the dengue virus.   

Operational research and learning from successful examples: 

Countries must learn and adopt successful examples of effective case management, prevention, community engagement, and vector control of dengue and other arboviruses through heightened research projects, particularly given the recent WHO recommendations on clinical trials.  

Ministries of Health and partners should closely review local interventions to accept and recommend them for public health programmes for early adaptation to reduce the growing health impact of dengue.     

WHO does not recommend that any general travel or trade restrictions be applied to countries/territories/areas based on the available information.  



Situation at a glance
On 1 November 2023, the International Health Regulations (IHR) National Focal Point of Zambia notified WHO of an anthrax outbreak in humans. The first human cases were reported from the Dengeza Health Post in the Sinazongwe District of the Southern Province on 5 May 2023. Around the same time period, domestic (cattle and goats) and wild animals (hippopotami) were reportedly dying from an unknown cause in the surrounding areas. In June 2023, human and animal cases were reported in the Kanchindu and Siameja veterinary camps of Sinazongwe District. Twenty-six human cases developed sores on their face, arms, and fingers after consuming meat from three wild hippopotamus carcasses. The first human case was reported on 16 June 2023 and laboratory confirmed by culture at the Lusaka Central Veterinary Research Institute (CVRI). As of 20 November 2023, 684 suspected human cases, including four deaths, a Case Fatality Ratio (CFR)of 0.6%, were reported from 44 out of 116 districts in nine of Zambia’s 10 provinces. Sinazongwe district is the epicenter, accounting for 287 cases (42% of total 684 cases) and two deaths (50% of total the four deaths). The most affected provinces are the Southern (370 cases; 54 %), Western (88; 13%), Lusaka (82; 12%), Eastern (66; 10%) and Muchinga (47; 7 %) Provinces. The majority of symptomatic cases were epidemiologically linked to confirmed cases and not tested. This unprecedented outbreak marks the first major occurrence spanning nine out of 10 country provinces. The latest large-scale outbreak reported in Zambia occurred in 2011 with a total of 511 suspected cases. Response activities have been taken from both human and animal sides, such as active surveillance, case management, laboratory diagnosis, health promotion, and Risk Communication and Community Engagement (RCCE), meat inspection and livestock vaccination. Anthrax is a zoonotic disease caused by a bacteria called Bacillus anthracis that typically affects ruminants (such as cows, sheep, and goats). The bacteria produce extremely potent toxins which are responsible for the symptoms, causing a high lethality rate in the pulmonary form. Humans can develop the disease from infected animals or through contaminated animal products. Hospitalization is required for all human cases identified. Vaccines are available for livestock and humans in limited supply. The risk of the event spreading within Zambia is assessed to be high due to the unrestricted animal movement and carcasses within and between provinces. The risk at the regional level is also considered high due to the frequent movement of both animals and people between Zambia and its neighbouring countries (such as Angola, Botswana, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, Tanzania, Uganda and Zimbabwe).
Description of the situation
On 1 November 2023, the IHR National Focal Point of Zambia notified WHO of an anthrax outbreak in humans. The first human cases were reported from the Dengeza Health Post in the Sinazongwe District of the Southern Province on 5 May 2023. Around the same period, domestic (cattle and goats) and wild animals (hippopotami) were reportedly dying from an unknown cause in the surrounding areas. While Zambia typically reports sporadic cases of anthrax annually, the investigation revealed that from September 2022 to January 2023, 42 suspected cases of anthrax in humans had been recorded at the Dengeza Health Post. All the cases presented at health facilities with skin sores and ulcers, and some of them developed nonspecific symptoms (e.g., nausea, vomiting, difficulty in breathing). Human specimens were collected during the investigation and sent to the Lusaka Central Veterinary Research Institute (CVRI) for testing. The initial samples collected and tested by culture returned negative for anthrax.

In June 2023, human and animal cases were reported in the Kanchindu and Siameja veterinary camps of Sinazongwe district.  Twenty-six human cases developed sores on their face, arms, and fingers after consuming meat from three wild hippopotamus carcasses. The first human case was reported on 16 June 2023 and laboratory confirmed by culture at the Lusaka CVRI. On the animal side, 13 domestic animals including cattle (10) and goats (3) out of Sinazongwe district susceptible population of 65 000 (30 000 cattle and 35 000 goats), under free range extensive traditional management, died of suspected anthrax. Cattle and goat specimens tested by culture at the Lusaka CVRI returned positive for anthrax on 17 July 2023. Until 1 November, anthrax outbreaks affecting animals and humans were reported in other Southern, Northwestern, and Western provinces.

As of 20 November 2023, 684 suspected human cases, including four deaths (CFR 0.6%) were reported from 44 out of 116 districts in nine of Zambia’s 10 provinces. Sinazongwe district is the epicenter, accounting for 287 cases (42% of total 684 cases) and two deaths (50% of total the four deaths).  The most affected provinces are the Southern (370 cases; 54 %), Western (84; 12%), Lusaka (82; 12%), Eastern (66; 10%) and Muchinga (47; 7 %) Provinces. The majority of symptomatic cases were epidemiologically linked to confirmed cases and not tested.

On the animal side, as of 21 November 2023, 568 domestic and wild animal cases were reported across 11 districts in Eastern, Southern, and Western provinces, with (344; 61%) occurring in the Southern province, (132; 23%) in the Muchinga province and (62, 11%) in the Western Province. Cases in wildlife, primarily hippos, were reported in the Eastern and Southern provinces.

This outbreak marks the first major occurrence spanning nine out of 10 country provinces. Previous outbreaks were confined to Northwest and Western provinces, with sporadic cases over the years. Of note, Zambia reported anthrax outbreaks in both human and animals in Western Province in 2017 and in Eastern Province in 2016 and 2011.

Figure 1. Distribution of anthrax cases by province, Zambia, as of 20 November 2023



Epidemiology
Anthrax is a disease caused by a spore-forming bacteria called Bacillus anthracis. It is a zoonosis (disease transmissible from animals to humans) that affects ruminants (such as cows, sheep, and goats). Anthrax does not typically spread from animal to animal or human to human.  When anthrax spores are ingested from contaminated animal products, inhaled, or enter the body through skin abrasions or cuts, they can germinate, multiply and produce toxins.

Depending on the type of exposure, within a few hours to three weeks, individuals may present one of the three clinical presentations of anthrax.

Cutaneous or skin anthrax is the most common presenting with an itchy bump in the exposed area that rapidly develops into a black sore. Some people then develop headaches, muscle aches, fever, and vomiting.
Gastrointestinal anthrax causes initial symptoms similar to food poisoning, but can worsen to produce severe abdominal pain, vomiting of blood and severe diarrhoea.
Pulmonary anthrax, the most severe presentation, has initial symptomatology of a common cold but can rapidly progress to severe breathing difficulties and shock. Diagnosis can be made through polychrome methylene blue-stained blood smears, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Hospitalization is required for all human cases identified. Individuals exposed may receive prophylactic treatment. Antibiotics, particularly penicillin, are effective against this disease. Prompt treatment can reduce case-fatality rate to <1%. Vaccines are also available for livestock and humans in limited supply.  Human vaccines are limited to those with possible occupational exposure.

Public health response
Response activities have been taken from both human and animal sides.

Actions taken for animals

With the support of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), livestock vaccination is ongoing. In total 338 000 doses of anthrax vaccine have been distributed up to 19 November 2023. Vaccination campaigns have been initiated at the outbreak epicentre, Sinazongwe district, and is extended to other affected districts. A joint One Health task force comprising the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Local Government has been conducting case finding in animals and humans. Meat inspection is enhanced by the veterinary department.  Additionally, the Department of Wildlife and Parks has been actively involved, conducting patrols to monitor illegal animal movements and ensuring proper disposal of carcasses. WHO is working closely with FAO and the Ministry of Agriculture on animal health activities like vaccination.

Actions implemented for humans

WHO is supporting and working closely with the Ministry of Health in the following activities.

For case management, health workers have undergone orientation to enhance their capacities to identify potential cases early on. Efforts have been made to strengthen event-based surveillance (EBS) and early detection mechanisms. Provision of essential medical supplies has been prioritized, in addition to public sensitization. Active surveillance is ongoing across healthcare facilities and within communities, including contact tracing.

Meat inspections are being conducted in abattoirs and butcher shops. Preparedness plans are in place, including the mobilization of additional healthcare personnel to districts, foreseeing a potential surge in anthrax cases. Moreover, specialized training sessions for provincial practitioners aim to improve case management proficiency in the provinces.

The laboratory continues to operate under a unified One Health approach for diagnostics. Procurement efforts for laboratory reagents are underway due to shortages. Strict protocols for disinfection and decontamination remain ongoing to ensure safety.

Extensive health promotion and Risk Communication and Community Engagement (RCCE) activities are ongoing, including press briefings by Ministry of Health, social media campaigns, radio broadcasts, and the distribution of informative brochures and posters.

WHO risk assessment
Anthrax is endemic in Zambia, usually occurring between May and January, with a peak toward the end of the dry season (between October and November). Although sporadic cases are reported yearly in animals and humans across the country, a large-scale outbreak like the current one has not been reported since 2011, when there were 511 suspected human cases.

The epidemic is spreading along the provinces located along the basin of the Zambezi, Kafue, and Luangwa rivers, which is an additional problem because these rivers also flow into Lake Kariba in Zimbabwe, Kahora Bassa in Mozambique and Lake Malawi, and the risk of anthrax transmission to neighbouring countries is increased.

Other affected districts and provinces of Zambia have reported sporadic suspected cases and deaths since June 2023. In addition, the Bacillus anthracis bacteria can form highly resistant spores that survive in the environment for decades

The risk for human health is high given the known population’s multiple exposures from handling the carcasses of animals that had died suddenly and eating meat from infected animals with resultant associated cutaneous and gastrointestinal anthrax.

The risk of the event spreading within Zambia has increased due to the unrestricted animal movement and carcasses within and between provinces. Since September 2023, there has been a significant rise in the number of affected districts. Moreover, a low index of suspicion, socio-cultural norms, community resistance, limited community knowledge regarding anthrax transmission, high levels of poverty and food insecurity, a shortage of available vaccines and laboratory reagents, inadequate carcass disposal and decontamination practices significantly contribute to hampering the containment of the anthrax outbreak.

There is an absence of robust engagement with local communities involved in breeding and handling cattle and livestock, including farmers, heads of cattle markets, and butchers. Among these communities, the fear of losing livelihoods often outweighs concerns about contracting anthrax. The risk of insufficient control capacities is considered high in Zambia due to concurrent public health emergencies in the country (cholera, measles, COVID-19) that limit the country’s human and financial capacities to respond to the current anthrax outbreak adequately.

The risk at the regional level is also considered high due to the frequent movement of both animals and people between Zambia and its neighbouring countries (such as Angola, Botswana, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, Tanzania, Uganda and Zimbabwe). This is compounded by the confirmed cases of anthrax spreading in provinces located along the basin of the Zambezi, Kafue, and Luangwa rivers. These rivers ultimately flow into Lake Kariba in Zimbabwe, the Kahora Bassa lake in Mozambique, and Lake Malawi.

Unburied carcasses of wild animals that float on the river increase the risk of international spread to neighbouring countries. They can spread the bacterium and infections to other regions, including neighbouring countries, and be eaten by other animals, which can further perpetuate the spread.

WHO advice
Humans usually acquire the infection after exposure to infected animals, carcasses, or animal products. More than 95% of human anthrax cases take the cutaneous form and result from handling infected carcasses or hides, hair, meat or bones from such carcasses. The public should avoid handling and consumption of meat from animals that died suddenly, meat obtained via emergency slaughter, and meat of uncertain origin. Anthrax can also be an occupational hazard for veterinarians, agriculture and wildlife workers, or workers who butcher animals or process meat, hides, hair, and wool and should wear preventive clothing and gloves or personal protection equipment (PPE).

In health-care settings, it is crucial to enhance screening procedures specifically in areas where there is a known epidemiological risk of anthrax. It is imperative to anticipate and implement infection prevention and control measures promptly when cases are suspected. When caring for patients with draining anthrax lesions, implementing contact precautions is vital. This includes placing the patient in a private room and the use of PPE (such as examination gloves and a fluid resistant gown). Additionally, dressings may be used to contain drainage and reduce the risk of environmental contamination. These dressings should be disposed of as infectious waste after use. The WHO’s 5 Moments for hand hygiene should be practiced using soap and water when caring for suspected and confirmed cases, as alcohol-based hand rub has weakened effect against spores. For areas where patients with suspected or confirmed exposure to anthrax spores are being cared for, it is recommended to implement enhanced cleaning and disinfection protocols.

Individuals potentially exposed to anthrax spores should receive prophylactic treatment. Anthrax responds well to antibiotics, which need to be prescribed by a medical professional. Strict adherence to the full course of treatment is vital. Human vaccines are in limited supply and used primarily for the protection of selected individuals with possible occupational exposure to anthrax.

International travelers to anthrax endemic countries should be aware of regulations concerning the importation of prohibited animal products, trophies, and souvenirs.

Anthrax is controlled through animal vaccination programs, rapid detection and reporting, quarantine, treatment of sub clinically affected animals (postexposure prophylaxis) and burning or burial of suspect and confirmed animal cases. The carcass should not be opened since exposure to oxygen will allow the bacteria to form spores. The general public and at-risk individuals should immediately report instances of sick or unexpected deaths in animals to veterinary authorities. Veterinary vaccines are used for control of anthrax in livestock. Vaccination protocols for livestock should be strictly followed to curb anthrax spread. Preventing the disease in animals will protect human health.

 WHO advises against implementing any travel or trade restrictions based on the current information available on this event.



Situation at a glance
On 25 November 2023, the International Health Regulations National Focal Point (IHR NFP) of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (United Kingdom) notified the World Health Organization (WHO) of a human case of swine-origin influenza A(H1N2) virus infection. This is the first swine influenza A(H1N2)v case reported in the United Kingdom. Human infections with swine-origin influenza viruses have been sporadically detected in the past in countries in the Americas, Asia, Australia and Europe. When a human is infected with a swine-origin influenza virus, the virus is referred to as a variant (or “v”) virus. Most human cases result from exposure to swine influenza viruses through direct contact with infected swine or contaminated environments. Current evidence suggests that these swine-origin influenza viruses have limited ability for sustained transmission among humans. This case was identified as part of routine surveillance of respiratory illnesses. The source of infection for this case is under investigation and contact tracing is in process. To date, no other confirmed cases associated with this event have been reported. WHO is in communication with national authorities to monitor the situation closely. Ongoing investigations are in place to identify the source of the infection and to characterize the risks of this influenza variant virus. WHO assesses the risk of spread of swine-origin influenza viruses through humans and/or community-level spread among humans as low. However, because these viruses continue to be detected in swine populations worldwide, further human cases following direct or indirect contact with infected swine can be expected. Current evidence suggests that these viruses have not acquired the ability to sustain transmission among humans. Due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect virological, epidemiological and clinical changes associated with circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal) health and timely virus sharing for risk assessment.
Description of the situation
On 25 November 2023, under the IHR (2005), the United Kingdom notified the WHO of a human case of influenza A(H1N2)v virus infection. The case reported onset of mild symptoms on 5 November.  He visited his general practitioner on 9 November; during this visit, a respiratory sample was collected and further analyzed as part of the national routine influenza surveillance programme. On 13 November, the sample was sent to United Kingdom Health Security Agency (UKHSA) laboratories and tested positive on 23 November for influenza A(H1N2)v virus, using reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The sample was further characterized by whole genome sequencing and results were available on the same date. On 25 November, a follow-up RT-PCR test was performed and tested negative for influenza.   The case is now fully recovered. 

Further laboratory analyses conducted at the Worldwide Influenza Centre at the Francis Crick Institute (a WHO Collaborating Centre) and the World Organization for Animal Health (WOAH) avian and swine influenza reference laboratory at the Animal and Plant Health Agency, indicated that this influenza A(H1N2)v virus belongs to the swine influenza virus genetic clade 1B.1.1. Similar A(H1N2) viruses from this genetic clade have been previously detected in pigs in the United Kingdom. However, this is the first time a virus from this swine genetic clade has been detected in a human in the United Kingdom. 

According to ongoing investigations, pig farms are located within a few miles of where the case resides; however, the case reported no direct exposure to pigs, pets, or farms.  The source of infection is currently under investigation and contact tracing is continuing.

Epidemiology
Influenza A viruses are enzootic in swine populations in most regions of the world. When an influenza virus that normally circulates in swine is detected in a person, it is called a “variant influenza virus”. A(H1N1), A(H1N2) and A(H3N2) are major subtypes of influenza viruses circulating in pigs and occasionally infect humans. 

Sporadic human infections with swine influenza viruses have been reported since the late 1950s, usually after direct or indirect exposure to pigs or contaminated environments. Since 2018, sporadic influenza A(H1N2)v cases among humans have been detected in other countries in Europe (Austria, Denmark, France and the Netherlands), the Americas (Brazil, Canada and the United States of America), Asia (China) and in Australia. Infections in humans have primarily been acquired through direct contact with infected animals or contaminated environments. Risk factors include proximity to infected pigs or visiting locations where pigs are exhibited. However, in some cases, no known exposure to swine was reported. 

Swine-origin influenza virus infections in humans tend to result in mild clinical illness, although some cases have been hospitalized with more severe disease and some have been fatal. Evidence of human-to-human spread of swine-origin influenza viruses is limited, and human-to-human onward transmissions are very rare or limited to one or two generations of infection.    

Laboratory testing with RT-PCR or other rapid molecular influenza assays (with similar high sensitivity and high specificity) are recommended when available. However, prompt treatment based on antivirals and supportive care should be the priority. WHO has produced guidelines for laboratory diagnosis of influenza and clinical management, and through the Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS), WHO closely monitors avian, swine and other zoonotic influenza viruses.

Public health response
WHO is closely collaborating with national authorities to monitor the situation. UKHSA has established an enhanced national incident team that is working with partners to investigate this incident and deliver a rapid response. Ongoing response activities by the UKHSA, the United Kingdom National Health Service and international partners include: 

Local epidemiological investigations and public health management, have been implemented, including case investigation, contact tracing and enhanced local surveillance for persons with occupational exposure to pigs/farms and the wider local community. 
Laboratory investigations are being conducted in collaboration with the UKHSA, Animal and Plant Health Agency (APHA) and the Crick Institute laboratories to further understand the virological characteristics of this virus.  
Communications activities, including ensuring proportionate communications to partners within government, with the National Health Service and international partners, have been implemented. 
WHO risk assessment
Influenza viruses circulate in swine populations in many regions of the world. Depending on geographic location, the genetic characteristics of these viruses differ. Most human cases result from exposure to swine influenza viruses through contact with infected swine or contaminated environments, although some cases have been reported without an apparent source of exposure to swine in the weeks prior to illness onset. Because these viruses continue to be detected in swine populations worldwide, further human cases following direct or indirect contact with infected swine can be expected. 

Current evidence suggests that these viruses have not acquired the ability to sustain transmission among humans. There has been limited, non-sustained human-to-human transmission of variant influenza viruses, although ongoing community transmission has not been identified. 

This is the first swine influenza A(H1N2)v case reported in the United Kingdom. There is no clear indication of direct contact with pigs or any ill individuals.  Though the source of infection is unknown at this time, the virus is closely aligned to that circulating in the swine population in the United Kingdom. Several previous variant cases have also not had clear exposure histories to swine and there was no evidence of sustained human-to-human transmission in these cases. Limited human-to-human transmission may have played a role, but there is no definitive evidence. 

Further virus characterization is ongoing. National routine surveillance indicators do not show any unusual increases in respiratory illness in the local population. The risk of there being additional human cases associated with this event appears to be low – though the possibility of limited person-to-person transmission cannot be excluded at this stage. 

The risk assessment will be reviewed should further epidemiological or virological information become available.

WHO advice
People with any respiratory symptoms should continue to follow the existing guidance, seek healthcare and avoid contact with other people while symptoms persist, particularly if the people they are coming into contact with are elderly or have existing medical conditions. 

Surveillance: 

This case does not change the current WHO recommendations on public health measures and seasonal influenza surveillance. 
WHO does not advise special traveler screening at points of entry or restrictions concerning the current situation of influenza viruses at the human-animal interface. 
Due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect virological, epidemiological and clinical changes associated with circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal) health and timely virus sharing for risk assessment.
Notification and investigation:  

All human infections caused by a novel influenza subtype are notifiable under the IHR (2005) and State Parties are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a recent human infection caused by an influenza A virus with the potential to cause a pandemic. Evidence of illness is not required. 
In the case of a confirmed or suspected human infection caused by a novel influenza virus with pandemic potential, including a variant virus, a thorough epidemiologic investigation of a history of exposure to animals, travel, and contact tracing should be conducted. The epidemiologic investigation should include early identification of unusual respiratory events that could signal person-to-person transmission of the novel virus. Clinical samples collected from the time and place of the case should be tested and sent to a WHO Collaboration Centre for further characterization.  
Prevention measures: 

General hygiene measures, such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals and avoiding contact with sick animals, should be adhered to. 
Travelers to countries with known outbreaks of animal influenza should avoid farms, contact with animals in live animal markets, entering areas where animals may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with animal feces. Travelers should also wash their hands often with soap and water. Travelers should follow good food safety and good food hygiene practices. Influenza viruses that infect pigs are different from human influenza viruses. There is no vaccine for zoonotic influenza infection licensed for use in humans. However, some partners have developed candidate vaccine viruses for novel zoonotic influenza viruses with pandemic potential as part of pandemic preparedness activities. 
Usually, influenza vaccines against human influenza viruses are generally not expected to protect people from influenza viruses that normally circulate in pigs. Although the seasonal influenza vaccine does not protect against swine viruses, WHO recommends seasonal influenza vaccination to avoid severe disease. 
In health-care settings, syndromic screening of health and care workers, patients, and visitors for symptoms of respiratory infections is recommended, accompanied with capacity and resources to implement transmission-based precautions to reduce the risk of health care-associated infections. If a case of a novel acute respiratory infection is suspected, please refer to advice in the WHO guideline for infection prevention and control of epidemic-and pandemic prone acute respiratory infections in health care.
WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions for the United Kingdom based on the currently available information.




Situation at a glance
Between 24 and 25 November 2023, the Ministry of Health of Cambodia notified WHO of two confirmed cases of human infection with influenza A(H5N1) from the same village in Kampot Province. Both cases were female, one in the 20-25 years age group and the other less than five years old. The first reported case visited a public hospital four days after having symptoms of fever, shortness of breath and cough. Samples were collected, which tested positive for H5N1, and the case died while in hospital. The second reported case was detected during enhanced surveillance by the public health authorities in response to the confirmation of the first reported case. The case had fever, cough and rash and is currently being treated in hospital. Epidemiological investigation shows both cases had exposure to backyard birds, which were reported to be sick, with some having died, over the prior month. The Ministry of Health's national and sub-national rapid response teams are investigating the source of the infection and coordinating response activities, including but not limited to active surveillance for additional cases, identifying close contacts for monitoring, and conducting health education campaigns to prevent transmission in the community. In total, six cases of influenza A(H5N1) have been reported from Cambodia this year. Influenza A(H5N1) infection in humans can cause severe disease, has a high mortality rate, and is notifiable under the International Health Regulations (2005).
Description of the situation
The Ministry of Health of Cambodia notified WHO of two confirmed human cases of influenza A (H5N1) between 24 and 25 November 2023. The cases resided in the same village in Kampot Province. Both cases were females, one in the age group of 20-25 years and the other less than 5 years old.

The first reported case developed fever, cough and shortness of breath on 19 November 2023, was treated at home for several days, and then visited a hospital on 23 November. At the hospital, samples were collected and transported to the National Institute of Public Health for testing and was subsequently confirmed as influenza A(H5N1) by RT-qPCR assays at the National Laboratory at National Institute of Public Health and reconfirmed by Institute Pasteur du Cambodge. The case was admitted and in intensive care at the hospital and passed away on 26 November 2023. The second reported case was detected during active surveillance in response to the first reported case, for additional cases with clinical presentation including fever, cough and rash. The case was transported to hospital on 25 November 2023 for testing with samples returning positive for influenza A(H5N1) by RT-qPCR assays at the National Laboratory at National Institute of Public Health and reconfirmed by at the Institute Pasteur du Cambodge. The case is currently admitted in an isolation room in the respiratory ward of the hospital and undergoing treatment. Epidemiological investigation shows both cases had exposure to backyard birds which were reported to be sick and dead, over the past month. No epidemiological linkage of these cases has yet been confirmed other than that they both resided in the same village.

Laboratory investigation shows the viruses, as indicated by phylogenetic analysis, fall within the H5 clade 2.3.2.1c with close similarity to the viruses that have been circulating in Cambodia and Southeast Asia since 2013-2014. The sequences cluster most closely with the viruses from the two human cases reported in October 2023.

Epidemiology
Animal influenza viruses normally circulate in animals but can also infect humans. Infections in humans have primarily been acquired through direct contact with infected animals or contaminated environments. Depending on the original host, influenza A viruses can be classified as avian influenza, swine influenza, or other types of animal influenza viruses.

Avian, swine, and other animal influenza virus infections in humans may cause disease ranging from mild upper respiratory tract infection to more severe diseases and can be fatal. Conjunctivitis, gastrointestinal symptoms, encephalitis and encephalopathy have also been reported. There have also been several detections of A(H5N1) virus in asymptomatic persons but who had exposure to infected birds in the days before a sample was collected.

Laboratory tests are required to diagnose human infection with influenza. WHO periodically updates technical guidance protocols for the detection of zoonotic influenza using molecular methods, e.g. Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Evidence suggests that some antiviral drugs, notably neuraminidase inhibitors (oseltamivir, zanamivir), can reduce the duration of viral replication and improve prospects of survival in some cases.

The confirmed cases are the fifth and sixth cases of human infection with influenza A(H5N1) reported from Cambodia in 2023, and the fourth reported death in 2023. From 2003 until now, 62 cases of human infection with influenza A(H5N1), including 41 deaths, have been reported from Cambodia.

Public health response
The Ministry of Health's national and sub-national rapid response teams, with support from the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, and the Ministry of Environment, have initiated and coordinated the detailed investigation of the avian influenza outbreak in Kampot Province including searching for additional suspected cases and contacts, collecting and testing samples from backyard birds and conducting health education campaigns to prevent transmission in the community.

WHO risk assessment
From 2003 to 27 November 2023, a total of 882 human cases of infection with influenza A(H5N1), including 461 deaths, have been reported globally from 23 countries. Almost all cases of human infection with avian influenza A(H5N1) have been linked to close contact with infected live or dead birds, or influenza A(H5N1)-contaminated environments. Based on evidence so far, the virus does not infect humans easily and spread from person-to-person appears to be unusual. Human infection can cause severe disease and has a high mortality rate. Since the virus continues to circulate in poultry, particularly in rural areas in Cambodia, the potential for further sporadic human cases can be expected.

In these two cases, while human-to-human transmission cannot be ruled out, it is likely there were separate exposures to the viruses from sick and dead chickens.

In the past, small clusters of A(H5) virus infections were reported, including those involving health care workers, but without evidence of sustained human-to-human transmission. Available epidemiological and virological evidence suggests that A(H5N1) viruses have not acquired the ability to sustain transmission among humans. Therefore, the likelihood of sustained human-to-human spread is low. Based on available information so far, WHO assesses the risk to the general population posed by this virus to be low. The risk assessment will be reviewed as needed if additional information becomes available. 

Close analysis of the epidemiological situation, further characterization of the most recent influenza A(H5N1) viruses in both human and poultry populations, and serological investigations are critical to assess associated risks to public health and promptly adjust risk management measures.

There are no specific vaccines for influenza A(H5N1) in humans. However, candidate vaccines to prevent influenza A(H5) infection in humans have been developed for pandemic preparedness in some countries. WHO continues to update the list of zoonotic influenza candidate vaccine viruses (CVV) selected twice a year at the WHO consultation on influenza virus vaccine composition. The list of such CVV is available on WHO website. In addition, the genetic and antigenic characterization of contemporary zoonotic influenza viruses are published on the Global influenza programme, human-animal interface website.

WHO advice
This event does not change the current WHO recommendations on influenza surveillance and public health measures.

Given reports of sporadic influenza A (H5N1) cases in humans, outbreaks in mammals, the widespread circulation in birds and the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect and monitor virological, epidemiological, and clinical changes associated with emerging or circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal) health and timely virus sharing for risk assessment.

The public should avoid contact with high-risk environments such as live animal markets/farms and live poultry, or surfaces that might be contaminated by poultry droppings. Additionally, it is recommended to maintain good hand hygiene with frequent washing or the use of alcohol-based hand sanitizer.

The general public and at-risk individuals should immediately report instances of sick or unexpected deaths in animals to veterinary authorities. Consumption of poultry or wild birds that are sick or have died unexpectedly should be avoided.

Any person who has had exposure to potentially infected birds or contaminated environments and feels unwell, should seek health care promptly and inform their healthcare provider of their possible exposure.

WHO advises against implementing any travel or trade restrictions based on the current information available on this event. WHO does not advise special traveler screening at points of entry or other restrictions due to the current situation of influenza viruses at the human-animal interface.

State Parties to the International Health Regulations (2005) are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a recent human infection caused by a new subtype of influenza virus. Evidence of illness is not required for this notification.



Description of the situation
Since mid-October 2023, the World Health Organization (WHO) has been monitoring data from Chinese surveillance systems that have been showing an increase in respiratory illness in children in northern China.

At a press conference on 13 November 2023, China’s National Health Commission reported on a nationwide increase in the incidence of respiratory diseases, predominantly affecting children. Chinese authorities attributed this increase to lifting of COVID-19 restrictions and the arrival of the cold season, and due to circulating known pathogens such as influenza, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), and severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Mycoplasma pneumonia and RSV are known to affect children more than adults.

On 22 November 2023, WHO identified media and ProMED reports about clusters of undiagnosed pneumonia in children's hospitals in Beijing, Liaoning and other places in China. Through the International Health Regulations mechanism, WHO made an official request to China to provide additional epidemiologic and clinical information, as well as laboratory results from these reported cases and data about recent trends in circulating respiratory pathogens. A key purpose was to identify whether there have been “clusters of undiagnosed pneumonia” in Beijing and Liaoning as referred to in media reports, and if so whether these were separate events, or part of the known general increase in respiratory illnesses in the community. WHO further reached out through clinical networks for additional information.

On 23 November, WHO held a teleconference with Chinese health authorities from the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention and the Beijing Children’s Hospital, facilitated by the National Health Commission and the National Administration of Disease Control and Prevention, in which the requested data were provided, indicating an increase in outpatient consultations and hospital admissions of children due to Mycoplasma pneumoniae pneumonia since May, and RSV, adenovirus and influenza virus since October. Some of these increases are earlier in the season than historically experienced, but not unexpected given the lifting of COVID-19 restrictions, as similarly experienced in other countries. No changes in the disease presentation were reported by the Chinese health authorities. Chinese authorities advised that there has been no detection of any unusual or novel pathogens or unusual clinical presentations, including in Beijing and Liaoning, but only the aforementioned general increase in respiratory illnesses due to multiple known pathogens. They further stated that the rise in respiratory illness has not resulted in patient loads exceeding hospital capacities.

The Chinese authorities advised that, since mid-October, enhanced outpatient and inpatient surveillance has been implemented for respiratory illnesses covering a broad spectrum of viruses and bacteria, including, for the first time, Mycoplasma pneumoniae. This complements existing respiratory surveillance mechanisms and may have contributed to the observed increase in detection and reporting of respiratory illness in children.

Public health response
Since mid-October, in addition to enhancing disease surveillance in health care facilities and community settings, Chinese authorities have stressed the need to strengthen the capacity of the health system to manage patients. China has systems in place to capture information on trends in influenza, influenza-like illness (ILI), RSV and SARS-CoV-2, pneumonia and other severe acute respiratory infections (SARI), and reports influenza detections to platforms such as the Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS). GISRS is led by WHO and used for the international virological and epidemiological surveillance of human influenza.

WHO is closely monitoring the situation and is in close contact with national authorities in China. WHO will continue to provide updates as warranted.

WHO risk assessment
In the current outbreak of respiratory illness, the reported symptoms are common to several respiratory diseases and, as of now, at the present time, Chinese surveillance and hospital systems report that the clinical manifestations are caused by known pathogens in circulation. Mycoplasma pneumoniae is a common respiratory pathogen and a common cause of paediatric pneumonia, and is readily treated with antibiotics.

China has an influenza-like illness (ILI) and severe acute respiratory infections (SARI) sentinel surveillance system. Since mid-October, China has implemented enhanced surveillance systems for respiratory illness covering a broad spectrum of respiratory viruses and bacteria, including Mycoplasma pneumoniae.

There is limited detailed information available to fully characterize the overall risk of these reported cases of respiratory illness in children. However, due to the arrival of the winter season, the increasing trend in respiratory illnesses is expected; co-circulation of respiratory viruses may increase burden on health care facilities.

According to surveillance data reported to WHO’s FluNet and published by the National Influenza Centre in China, ILI was above usual levels for this time of year and increasing in the northern provinces. Influenza detections were predominantly A(H3N2) and B/Victoria lineage viruses.

WHO advice
Based on the available information, WHO recommends that people in China follow measures to reduce the risk of respiratory illness, which include recommended vaccines against influenza, COVID-19 and other respiratory pathogens as appropriate; keeping distance from people who are ill; staying home when ill; getting tested and medical care as needed; wearing masks as appropriate; ensuring good ventilation; and practicing regular handwashing.

WHO does not recommend any specific measures for travellers to China. In general, persons should avoid travel while experiencing symptoms suggestive of respiratory illness, if possible; in case of symptoms during or after travel, travellers are encouraged to seek medical attention and share travel history with their health care provider.

WHO advises against the application of any travel or trade restrictions based on the current information available on this event.



Situation at a glance
Mpox is an infectious disease caused by monkeypox virus (MPXV), which is endemic in densely forested regions of West, Central and East Africa, particularly in the northern and central regions of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Eleven of the 26 provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo are identified as endemic for mpox, but in more recent years the total number of mpox cases and the number of provinces reporting mpox has been expanding, to 22 provinces as of November 2023. There are two known clades of MPXV: clade I, previously known as the Congo Basin clade; and clade II, previously called the West African clade; clade II further has two subclades: clade IIa and clade IIb. Before 2018, very few cases were reported outside of the African continent: eight international travellers returning from endemic countries and one outbreak related to imported animals. Since 2022, an epidemic of clade IIb MPXV has been ongoing globally, affecting many countries outside the African continent that had never reported mpox previously. The spread of this epidemic was mainly driven by transmission via sexual contact among men who have sex with men. The Democratic Republic of the Congo has not reported cases of mpox linked to clade IIb MPXV during the global outbreak to date; only MPXV clade I has been detected in the country. Before April 2023, no formally documented cases of sexual transmission of clade I MPXV were registered globally. The first known cases were reported when a man, resident in Belgium and with connections to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, tested positive for clade I in Kenge, Kwango province, during a visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Thereafter, sexual contacts of this case in the Democratic Republic of the Congo also tested positive for clade I MPXV, with closely related viral sequences. This is the first time that reported clade I MPXV infection is linked to sexual transmission within a cluster. Another outbreak in the country is also being reported with multiple cases of mpox among sex workers. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, human-to-human transmission of mpox through close contact has been reported since the 1970s, mostly in small household or community outbreaks, presumed to be primarily due to zoonotic transmission. Due to a lack of timely access to diagnostics, difficulties with linking cases to any contact with infectious animals, and incomplete epidemiological and contact tracing investigations over the years, the dynamics of MPXV clade I transmission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are not well understood. These new features of sexual and unknown modes of transmission now raise additional concerns over the continuing rapid expansion of the outbreak in the country. In the global outbreak of mpox which began in 2022, clade IIb MPXV transmission between humans continues in most WHO regions. In addition, clade I MPXV community outbreaks occur regularly in three countries (Cameroon, Central African Republic, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo) and sporadically in others (e.g., Sudan, South Sudan). In some of these geographic areas in East, West and Central Africa, transmission from animals to humans is also presumed to occur. The natural reservoir of the virus is unknown; while various small mammals such as squirrels and monkeys are known to be susceptible, they have rarely been linked to outbreaks.
Description of the situation
From 1 January through 12 November 2023, a total of 12 569 suspected mpox cases, including 581 suspected mpox deaths (case fatality ratio: 4.6%), have been reported in 156 health zones from 22 out of 26 (85%) provinces in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This is the highest number of annual cases ever reported, with new cases in geographic areas that had previously not reported mpox, including Kinshasa, Lualaba, and South Kivu. Among suspected cases, 1106 were tested by real time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), and 714 were positive for MPXV (positivity rate of 65%).

Cases with travel history to endemic provinces have been driving chains of human-to-human transmission in non-affected provinces (Figure 1 & 2).

Figure 1: Geographic distribution of suspected mpox cases by province, Democratic Republic of the Congo, 1 January – 4 November 2023 (Epi weeks 1 to 44) 
Figure 2: Geographic distribution of confirmed mpox cases by province, Democratic Republic of the Congo, 1 January – 7 October 2023 (epi weeks 1 to 40)


First cases of sexually transmitted clade I MPXV: 

The first cluster of suspected cases of sexually transmitted mpox was identified in Kenge, Kwango province of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It included six confirmed cases, five men and one woman, with no deaths among the confirmed cases. The first known case is a man, resident of Belgium with connections to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, who arrived in Kinshasa, on 15 March 2023 and started experiencing anal itching and discomfort the same day. On 16 March 2023, one day after arrival from Belgium, he travelled to the town of Kenge (260 km from Kinshasa). On 17 March, his anal lesion and genitals became painful blisters, and he developed further skin lesions on the trunk and buttocks. On 23 March, he consulted a doctor who suspected mpox, and a blood sample, oropharyngeal, rectal and vesicle swabs were performed on 24 March. The patient tested positive by RT-PCR of biological samples at the National Institute of Biomedical Research (INRB) in Kinshasa and the result was shared with the Ministry of Health on 10 April. Genomic sequencing of the sample confirmed that it was clade I MPXV. 

The individual identified himself as a man who has sexual relations with other men. During his travel in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, he visited discretely operating known clubs of men who have sex with men and had several sexual contacts. He showed symptoms on the day of his arrival in the country, and with the mpox incubation period most often being more than one day, available information suggests that exposure took place outside the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Nonetheless, genetic analysis of the virus confirmed infection with a clade I strain, similar to other strains circulating in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Although the patient had no reported exposure to another person with confirmed mpox, based on the epidemiological investigation exposure to mpox likely occurred in Belgium. 

Epidemiological investigation following this first case identified several sexual and non-sexual contacts who were monitored over time for mpox signs and symptoms.  Among 27 contacts identified and six tested, five sexual contacts tested positive for mpox: two were confirmed on 10 April and three on 18 April. Of these five contacts, three developed symptoms during their 21-day follow-up period. Two contacts who did not develop symptoms also tested positive by a mucous membrane sample. Of the five confirmed contact cases, four were men aged between 24 and 35 years old and one was a woman. The initial case confirmed having sexual contact with each of them. After his recovery from mpox he returned to Belgium on 5 May 2023. 

This cluster of mpox cases represents the first documented sexual transmission of MPXV Clade I. It is also the first described transmission of MPXV Clade I among men who have sex with men. Notably, there are clubs in Kenge for men who have sex with men, some of whose members travel to visit other clubs within the country and outside the country, particularly in Europe and within Central Africa. In the city of Kinshasa, there are more than 50 such clubs. Some members of these clubs also reside outside the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This event is unusual and highlights the risk that MPXV clade I could also widely spread among sexual networks, as seen for clade II during the 2022-23 global outbreak. 

On 28 July 2023, another confirmed case of mpox was recorded in another man who had sex with men in Kenge town in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The patient was a man residing in Kenge, with onset of the disease on 11 June 2023. He was not listed among the contacts of the first group of cases and the limited epidemiological investigation did not directly link him to the March-April cluster. Genome sequencing for this case has not been performed. Further epidemiological investigations are being conducted to verify reports of new cases in this province.

First mpox outbreak in Kinshasa

In August 2023, for the first time, mpox cases were confirmed in Kinshasa, the capital of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Four separate events were identified where persons exposed in other provinces (Equateur, Maindombe) travelled to Kinshasa, each leading to local transmission with small clusters in the capital. Between 18 August and 12 November 2023, a total of 102 suspected cases were reported in eight health zones in Kinshasa, including 18 confirmed cases with one confirmed mpox death (case fatality ratio of 5.6% among confirmed cases). 

The first confirmed case was in a person who arrived from the Maindombe province, where mpox is endemic, to Kinshasa by river boat. He was confirmed on August 18 and subsequently several of his close contacts developed symptoms and tested positive for MPXV. Additional imported confirmed cases were reported in Limete, Makala and Nsele health zones. The sex ratio among confirmed cases in Kinshasa is men 2: women 1, with a median age of 24 (95% CI 11-27) years.  For the moment, 13 of the confirmed cases have recovered (including a health worker), one died and four are isolated and under treatment. The person who died also had tuberculosis and acquired mpox during hospitalization, indicating nosocomial transmission.  

These new reports of human-to-human transmission of mpox in a large urban area such as Kinshasa clearly illustrate that the epidemiology of mpox in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is changing.  

First mpox outbreak in South Kivu

Before 2023, South Kivu province had not reported mpox. The first confirmed case was a young trader who travelled from Kisangani, in Tshopo province, one of the mpox endemic provinces, a few days before the onset of symptoms on 26 September 2023. The first skin lesions were located on his genitals and later extended to the whole body. During the initial epidemiological investigation, 113 contacts were registered in Bukavu and Kamituga health zones. As of 22 November 2023, a total of 80 suspected and 34 confirmed cases (including 20 sex workers) of mpox have been reported in South Kivu mainly from the Kamituga health zone, with no deaths. Currently South Kivu province is grappling with conflict, displacement, food insecurity, and challenges in providing adequate humanitarian assistance, all of which have a profound impact on the local population, especially vulnerable groups, and might represent fertile ground for further spread of mpox. 

Animal studies

The natural reservoir of the monkeypox virus is unknown – various small mammals such as squirrels and monkeys can be infected, and non-human primates are known to be clinically susceptible. Over the decades, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and partners have carried out animal studies to better characterize the ecology of the virus and potential animal reservoirs or incidental hosts. Such studies have been carried out in the provinces of Equateur, Haut Uélé, Kwango, Kwilu, Maïndombe, Maniema, Sankuru, Sud Ubangi, Tshopo, and Tshuapa. Eco-epidemiolocal studies are ongoing with national and international research partners collaborating to determine reservoir and incidental hosts. 

Epidemiology
Mpox (monkeypox) is an infectious disease caused by the monkeypox virus (MPXV). There are two known clades of MPXV: clade I, previously called the Congo Basin clade; and clade II, previously called the West Africa clade; clade II further has two subclades: clade IIa and clade IIb. The disease is caused by one of the two clades of MPXV transmitted between humans through close contact with lesions, body fluids, respiratory droplets or contaminated materials, or from animals to humans through contact with live animals or consumption of contaminated bushmeat.

The incubation period ranges from two to 21 days, although some people can acquire infection without developing symptoms. Typically for mpox, fever, muscle aches and sore throat appear first, followed by skin and mucosal rash. Typically, the rash evolves over 2-4 weeks in stages – macules, papules, vesicles, pustules. Lesions dip in the centre before crusting over. Scabs then fall off. Lymphadenopathy (swollen lymph nodes) is also a typical feature of mpox, present in most cases.  Children, pregnant people and people with weak immune systems are at risk for complications and death from mpox.

Identifying mpox can be difficult as other infections and conditions can look similar. It is important to distinguish mpox from chickenpox, measles, bacterial skin infections, scabies, herpes, syphilis, other sexually transmissible infections, and medication-associated allergies. Someone with mpox may also concurrently have another sexually transmissible infection such as herpes. Alternatively, a child or adult with suspected mpox may also have chickenpox. For these reasons, testing is key for people to get treatment as early as possible and to prevent further spread.

Detection of viral DNA by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is the preferred laboratory test for mpox. The best diagnostic specimens are taken directly from the rash – skin, fluid or crusts – collected by vigorous swabbing. In the absence of skin lesions, testing can be done on oropharyngeal, anal or rectal swabs. However, while a positive result of oropharyngeal, anal or rectal sample is indicative of mpox, a negative result is not enough to exclude MPXV infection. Testing of blood is not recommended. Antibody detection methods may be used for retrospective case classification, but not diagnosis. It needs to be restricted to reference laboratories and it may not be useful as often it does not distinguish between different orthopoxviruses.

Treatment is based on taking care of the rash, managing pain, and preventing complications. In addition, specific antiviral medications such as tecovirimat can also be used in the treatment of mpox, particularly for severe cases or individuals at higher risk of complications. In the context of the global outbreak of mpox which began in 2022 (caused mostly by Clade IIb virus), the presentation of mpox varied, with some cases showing a rash appearing before or simultaneously with other symptoms, and the initial lesions were often localized on genitals and mucosae such as the mouth. For the first time the spread of MPXV has been driven and sustained by sexual contact among men who have sex with men who are members of large sexual networks. 

Public health response
Emergency coordination: 

The Ministry of Public Health, Hygiene and Prevention prepared a budgeted national mpox preparedness and response plan.
Further to this plan, an mpox Emergency Operations Centre and Incident Management Team were inaugurated in February 2023 to implement the following actions:  
Monitoring and detection: 

Strengthening surveillance of mpox throughout the country and particularly in Kinshasa, Kenge and Kamituga. 
Distribution of sample collection and transport kits to reference hospitals and logistical support for collecting, transporting, and examining samples from suspected cases in Kenge, Kinshasa and other affected areas.
Capacity building of health care providers and professionals in mpox surveillance, including detection of sexual transmission and other possible modes of transmission. 
Monitoring of contacts of clinical and laboratory-confirmed cases for a period of 21 days. 
Genetic sequencing of MPXV samples to better understand the circulating viral strain(s). 
 Communication and awareness: 

Information campaign on the risks of mpox and other sexually transmitted infections to groups potentially at risk, specifically targeting members of sex-clubs in Kenge and elsewhere. 
Identification and engagement of other clubs and populations potentially at risk. 
Establishment of a call center to facilitate alerts reporting and promote communication between health authorities and the communities concerned.  
Case management and infection prevention and control:

Supply of personal protective equipment to health professionals in Kenge, Kinshasa, Kamituga Maindombe and Tshopo. 
Isolation of confirmed cases in hospital or at home to prevent further transmission.
Adapted clinical care, including psychological support, for persons with mpox.  
Training and capacity:

Training of laboratory workers from Kamituga, Kenge, Kinshasa and any other affected city or province on the collection, conservation, and appropriate delivery of mpox samples. 
Raising awareness among health authorities and health care providers across the country about mpox and its management.
WHO risk assessment
From 1 January to 12 November 2023, there has been a two-fold increase in the number of suspected mpox cases with 12 569 suspected cases reported, compared to 6216 in 2020, the highest annual number previously reported. Mpox has also been reported in new geographic areas such as Kinshasa, Kwango province and South Kivu. The reasons for this expansion, affecting men, women and children, remain unknown. Although increased awareness of the global mpox epidemic due to clade IIb MPXV has helped improve surveillance in the country, many aspects of the current situation remain to be elucidated. 

Transmission of mpox through sexual contact enables faster spread from one person to another due to direct contact of mucous membranes, possibly leading to a shorter average incubation period. Immunocompromised individuals, either due to uncontrolled HIV or other immunocompromising conditions, are at higher risk for severe mpox complications and mpox-related death.  While national HIV prevalence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is estimated to be <1%, it is estimated to be 7.1% among men who have sex with men. Overall, an estimated 17% of people living with HIV in the country do not know their status, putting them at risk of developing advanced HIV infection, compromised immunity, and severe mpox disease.

The detection of clade I MPXV among visitors to a club of men who have sex with men in Kenge, some of whose members travel to visit other clubs within and outside the country, particularly in central Africa and in Europe, represents a risk for men who have sex with men in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and internationally. In the city of Kinshasa, it is estimated that there are over 50 similar clubs, and some of their members reside outside the Democratic Republic of the Congo. 

It is still unclear what proportion of mpox cases in the Democratic Republic of the Congo may be exposed through sexual contact; however, with outbreaks linked to sexual transmission documented in 2023 in three previously unaffected provinces, the potential additional public health impact of this new observation could be significant, particularly in under-resourced urban areas. The rapid evolution of the new outbreak in South Kivu, including among sex workers, is also concerning.

Additionally, the first case identified in Kinshasa had traveled to the city by boat on the Congo river. These boats constitute a potentially high exposure environment since people are often in proximity, transporting animals, selling and consuming wild game on board, and often traveling on the boats for weeks while sharing beds and sometimes engaging in sexual activities. Moreover, the human-to-human spread potential is amplified in urban settings such as Kinshasa and the implementation of containment measures is more challenging.

Response capacities for mpox remain limited in the country. Surveillance and laboratory capacities remain suboptimal: only 9% (1106 / 12 569, as of week 44) of suspected cases this year have been tested by PCR. There are no immunization programmes for populations at risk of mpox in the Democratic Republic of the Congo outside of research projects, and access to the antiviral medication tecovirimat also remains limited to a few clinical research studies in the country.

Risk communication and community engagement are therefore of critical importance to address the risk posed by modes of transmission traditionally reported as bushmeat consumption and community outbreaks, as well as for the newly described risk of sexual transmission, particularly among men who have sex with men. According to a recent WHO study, awareness of the risks associated with mpox is low in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Additionally, anyone suffering from disfiguring skin conditions, including due to mpox, may face stigma, and the lack of health messages to date for men who have sex with men in the country exposes this population to a particular risk. 

In summary, the reasons for concern about further spread of mpox in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are as follows:

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is experiencing a significant increase in the number of suspected cases reported in 2023;      
Geographic expansion of the presence of mpox is underway in the newly affected southern and eastern provinces of the country;
Epidemiological and scientific knowledge about mpox remains limited and modes of transmission in the country are poorly understood;
In 2023, confirmed cases of mpox have been reported in the large urban area of ​​Kinshasa and several other previously unaffected areas for the first time;
Sexual transmission of mpox due to clade I MPXV is being documented for the first time and chains of transmission may have been missed;
Key populations experience a higher prevalence of HIV infection than the general population;
Awareness of mpox and the associated risks are insufficient in the general and key populations;
National response capacities face challenges, including limited epidemiological information on exposure and infection risk factors, limited public awareness of mpox and prevention measures, and numerous competing priorities;
Collaboration and coordination among partners are needed to sustain essential research and support a robust response at national as well as provincial and local levels. 
The risk of mpox further spreading to neighbouring countries and worldwide appears to be significant. In addition to the features outlined above, arguments supporting the assessment of a high risk of international spread of mpox include the following: 

These first reported outbreaks of mpox due to clade I MPXV linked to sexual contact include a history of international travel within and across WHO regions;
The introduction of clade I MPXV in different and possibly intersecting sexual networks could facilitate and amplify the spread of this historically more virulent clade of the virus;
A concurrent outbreak of mpox is occurring in the neighbouring Republic of Congo along the Congo River ecosystem, whose links, if any, with cases in the Democratic Republic of the Congo remain unknown.
These factors pose an additional risk of mpox outbreaks with potentially more severe consequences than the one which has been affecting the world since 2022. 

WHO advice
All countries, including their health authorities and clinicians/healthcare workers, should take note that the global mpox outbreak is ongoing; and, furthermore, the occurrence of sexual transmission of the clade I virus has been confirmed. Infection with clade I MPXV may lead to an increased risk of severe illness. 

It is therefore strongly advised that countries continue to follow the Standing Recommendations of the Director-General of the WHO issued in August 2023, particularly concerning the epidemiological surveillance of mpox, strengthening of laboratory diagnostic capacities and genomic sequencing of viruses, community engagement and risk communication, making vaccines available, optimal case management, strengthening research to better understand modes of transmission in different contexts, and sustained support for the development of rapid diagnostic methods and treatments tailored to the needs of patients. 

In all settings, it is essential to emphasize the importance of case investigation with sensitivity and absence of stigma and in-depth understanding of human-to-human transmission of mpox in communities, while strengthening the One Health approach in areas where the monkeypox virus circulates in possible mammalian hosts or reservoirs. 

It is essential to deepen knowledge in different contexts about the links between mpox and HIV infection, their respective and common risk factors, to provide a population specific health service, and to integrate surveillance and case management within a strengthened and agile health service which meets patient needs. 

Actions in the community

Communication on the risks of sexual transmission of mpox must be strengthened, especially among the people most at risk and individuals and households affected by this disease. Advocacy must be done at all levels to support, inform and engage community leaders in implementing the necessary measures to inform and engage their communities about mpox and how to stop its spread. 

Risk communication and community engagement activities will be vital in motivating affected communities to become aware of the risks and locally relevant protective behaviours. Socio-behavioural data should be collected, and a situation analysis should be carried out to better understand transmission and risk factors. This information can then be used to improve decision-making, to ensure response efforts are aligned with community needs, priorities and capacities, and to inform the development of risk communications plans and evidence-based community engagement. Key audiences should be identified, including health professionals, men who have sex with men, people working at or attending venues and events where sexual activity takes place, sex workers, and people at risk of more serious illness (including those whose HIV is not treated or adequately controlled).

Partnerships should be established with trusted networks working with these communities to facilitate community engagement. Two-way feedback systems should be established or activated. Particular attention should be paid to measures to understand, prevent and combat stigma and discrimination – these are never acceptable and can undermine the response to the epidemic and have a serious impact on health outcomes. 

Concerning the health facility, points of entry and control

Infection prevention and control measures in community venues and health centers are necessary to prevent and respond to outbreaks of mpox. It is important to train staff on the risks linked to contamination, to provide protective equipment, hand washing and hygiene devices in hospitals and at entry/control points; and ensuring appropriate patient isolation is in place. Health care professionals caring for patients with suspected or confirmed mpox infection should take “standard,” “contact,” and “droplet” precautions.

While protecting themselves with recommended measures, healthcare workers should also ensure that stigmatization of patients with mpox is avoided, and that psychological support is provided to patients and their families. 

WHO advises against any travel or trade restrictions for the current outbreak. 

When collecting clinical and laboratory specimens

Specimens collected from persons and animals suspected of being infected with MPXV should be handled by trained personnel working in equipped laboratories. Confirmation of monkeypox virus depends on the type and quality of the sample, and the type of laboratory test. Thus, specimens must be packaged and shipped in accordance with national and international requirements. RT-PCR is the preferred laboratory test, given its accuracy and sensitivity. For this, the optimal diagnostic samples for MPXV should be taken from skin or mucosal lesions - fluid from vesicles and pustules, and dry scabs. PCR blood tests are generally inconclusive due to the short duration of viremia compared to the time of sample collection after the onset of symptoms; they should not be systematically collected from patients. Because orthopoxviruses are serologically cross-reactive, antigen and antibody detection methods are not sufficiently specific for MPXV and do not constitute a formal confirmatory diagnosis. It is therefore essential that laboratories support health authorities in providing specimen collection kits for skin or mucosal lesions. 

Preventive measures  

Anyone with a clinical or laboratory-confirmed diagnosis of mpox should follow the instructions of health authorities according to the local context, including isolation during the infectious period whenever feasible. Contacts of a confirmed case should be monitored or should self-monitor for any sign or symptom, practice hand hygiene and respiratory etiquette, avoid contact with immunocompromised individuals, children, or pregnant women, and avoid sexual contact and non-essential travel for a period of 21 days from the last contact with a person with mpox.

Vaccines and antiviral treatments

Vaccines for the prevention of mpox are composed of vaccinia virus and were first developed as safer vaccines for the purpose of smallpox preparedness: third-generation vaccines causing fewer side effects than the vaccines used during smallpox eradication are available. These include MVA-BN, first approved for the prevention of mpox in 2019 and the LC16-KMB vaccine approved for mpox in 2022. These vaccines offer 66-90% protection against mpox due to the antigenic similarity of the viruses that cause smallpox and mpox. A few countries maintain stocks of vaccines against smallpox and mpox, especially since the start of the global outbreak in 2022. Vaccination against mpox is recommended for persons at risk of contracting the disease, including children, and persons who have been in close contact with someone who has mpox. 

Antivirals are also being developed and a clinical trial of the antiviral agent tecovirimat is ongoing in the the Democratic Republic of the Congo in two district hospitals in the provinces of Maniema & Sankuru.  In order to access tecovirimat in the country, a request can be made to national health authorities. 




Situation at a glance
On 5 September 2023, the Ministry of Health notified WHO of a diphtheria outbreak in Guinea. From 4 July to 13 October 2023, a total of 538 cases of diphtheria, were reported in the Kankan region, in the east-central part of Guinea. Of the total cases reported, 520 are suspected and 18 confirmed with 58 deaths including 13 among confirmed cases (case fatality rate (CFR) among all cases, 11%). The 1-4 years age group accounted for the largest proportion of reported cases. Diphtheria is a highly contagious vaccine-preventable disease caused mainly by the bacteria Corynebacterium diphtheriae which can be fatal in 5-10% of cases, with a higher mortality rate in young children. However, in settings with poor access to diphtheria antitoxin, the CFR can be as high as 40%. Diphtheria remains a significant health problem in countries with poor routine vaccination coverage. According to WHO/UNICEF estimates of national immunization coverage (WUENIC), the immunization coverage with the diphtheria tetanus toxoid and pertussis (DTP3) containing vaccine was reported to be 47% for 2022 in Guinea and has remained below 50% since 2014. This is insufficient for achieving the coverage of 80–85% required to maintain community protection. WHO assesses the risk of diphtheria to be high in Guinea, considering the chronically low vaccination coverage.
Description of the situation
On 5 September 2023, the Ministry of Health notified WHO of the current diphtheria outbreak in Guinea. On 4 July 2023, two children aged 2 and 4 years, attended the otolaryngology department of the Siguiri prefectural hospital in the Kankan region of Guinea, for similar symptoms (dyspnea, dysphasia, fever, cough). They were hospitalized for tonsillitis and respiratory infection and received antibiotic treatment before being referred to the Kankan regional hospital for additional care.

Since 4 July and as of 13 October 2023, 538 cases have been reported, including 18 confirmed cases. In total, 58 deaths including 13 among confirmed cases were registered (case fatality rate (CFR) among all cases, 11%)., and 461 contacts are being followed up. Of the cases reported, 62% are female. The 1-4 years age group, with 445 cases, accounted for the largest proportion of reported cases, 82%, followed by the 5-9 years age group, with 5% and 5% for the 10 years and above age group. Children under the age of 12 months make up 7% of reported cases. None of the 538 cases were vaccinated.

Kankan Region is divided into five prefectures and only the Kérouané prefecture has not reported any cases to date.

The prefecture of Siguiri is the most affected, with 510 cases (95%). Of the 363 patients admitted to the treatment centers in Siguiri, 37 (10%) have died.

Other prefectures reporting cases are Mandiana (13 cases), Kankan (13 cases) and Kouroussa (two cases).  Of the 15 patients admitted in the treatment center in Kankan, 12 (80%) have died.

The treatment centers in the country do not have the capacity in terms of human resources and material for adequate case management. Suspected and confirmed cases were treated with Amoxicillin and Azithromycin as first line therapy. Antibiotic prophylaxis (Amoxicillin, Azithromycin) was administered to the direct contacts.

Figure 1: Distribution of diphtheria cases in Kankan region, Guinea, as of 13 October 2023 



Figure 2: Suspected diphtheria cases by epidemiological week in Guinea, as of 13 October 2023



Epidemiology
Diphtheria is a highly contagious vaccine-preventable disease caused mainly by Corynebacterium diphtheria but also by Corynebacterium ulcerans. It spreads between people mainly by direct contact or through the air via respiratory droplets. The disease can affect all age groups; however, unimmunized children are most at risk.

Symptoms often come on gradually, beginning with a sore throat and fever. In severe cases, the bacteria produce a poison (toxin) that causes a thick grey or white patch at the back of throat. This can block the airways, making it hard to breathe or swallow, and also creates a barking cough. The neck may swell in part due to enlarged lymph nodes.

Treatment involves administering diphtheria antitoxin (DAT) as well as antibiotics. Vaccination against diphtheria has been effective in reducing the mortality and morbidity from diphtheria dramatically. Diphtheria is fatal in 5-10% of cases, with a higher mortality rate in young children. However, in settings with poor access to DAT, the CFR can be as high as 40%.

Public health response
Guinea has strengthened epidemiological surveillance for early detection and case management.
Daily coordination and monitoring meetings on the response activities are underway at the Regional level, led by the regional health inspector and with the support of WHO, MSF- Belgium and other partners in the region.
Notification of all suspected cases of diphtheria, investigation initiation, and monitoring of contacts as soon as possible has been enhanced.
Contact tracing, identification of an isolation zone at the Balato health post in the prefecture of Kouroussa and briefing of the healthcare workers on the case definition and prevention measures are ongoing.
Case management activities such as antibiotic therapy (Amoxicillin, Azithromycin), treatment of suspected cases, antibiotic prophylaxis (Amoxicillin, Azithromycin) for the direct contacts and free case management at treatment centers with support from MSF are provided.
Risk communication and community engagement efforts, such as raising awareness of cases in the community and identifying and briefing a communicator to raise awareness among parents of patients is ongoing.
WHO risk assessment
Diphtheria is a vaccine-preventable disease caused by exotoxin-producing Corynebacterium diphtheriae, transmitted from person to person through close physical and respiratory contact. It can cause infection of the nasopharynx, which may lead to breathing difficulties and death. Diphtheria is fatal in 5 - 10% of cases, with a higher mortality rate in young children. Treatment involves administering diphtheria antitoxin as well as antibiotics. Vaccination against diphtheria has reduced the mortality and morbidity of diphtheria dramatically.

The DAT supply is currently very constrained and insufficient to respond to current demands, as there is only a limited number of manufacturers and large outbreaks are being reported in different regions of the world.

The risk of diphtheria in Guinea is considered high due to the low DTP3 vaccination coverage in the affected region (36% according to the survey coverage in households, 2023) and 47% national DTP3 vaccination coverage between 2014-2022 (per WHO/UNICEF estimates), and the risk at the regional level is moderate and low at the global level. The outbreak is also characterized by high case fatality among confirmed cases. Other factors include: the over population of the Siguiri health district, which is the epicenter of this outbreak, the weakened healthcare system and several concurrent epidemics in the area.

The overpopulation of the Siguiri health prefecture, the epicenter of this epidemic, the insufficient poorly qualified health personnel, and the limited material resources of the health system weakens the response to this outbreak. In addition, the country is facing several concurrent epidemics in the area, such as pertussis, poliomyelitis, and rabies. Adding this to a context of extreme vulnerability due to mining activities, which induce significant population movement, reduce air quality, and increase the risk of natural disasters such as floods and landslides, impacting people’s health.

This emphasizes the urgent need to strengthen diphtheria vaccination coverage nationwide, especially in the epicenter and strengthen case management at hospital facilities dealing with diphtheria cases.

WHO advice
The control of diphtheria is based on primary disease prevention by ensuring high population immunity through vaccination and secondary prevention of spread by the rapid investigation of close contacts to ensure prompt treatment of those infected.

Epidemiological surveillance ensuring early detection of diphtheria outbreaks should be in place in all countries, and all countries should have access to laboratory facilities for reliable identification of toxigenic C. diphtheriae. Adequate quantities of diphtheria antitoxin should be available nationally or regionally for the medical management of cases.

Vaccination is vital to preventing cases and outbreaks, and adequate clinical management involves administering diphtheria anti-toxin to neutralize the toxin and antibiotics reducing complications and mortality.

WHO recommends early reporting and case management of suspected diphtheria cases to initiate the timely treatment of cases and follow-up of contacts and ensure the supply of diphtheria antitoxin.

WHO advises implementing the following Infection Prevention & Control (IPC) measures in health care settings:

At screening/triage, immediately place patients with symptoms of Upper Respiratory Tract Infection (URTI) in a separate area until examined, and, if a probable case, cohorted with patients with the same diagnosis. Keep the isolation area segregated from other patient-care areas.

In addition to using standard precautions, patients with known or suspected respiratory diphtheria are placed under droplet precautions. Patients with known or suspected cutaneous diphtheria should be placed under contact precautions. Maintain one meter between patients. Keep patient care areas well- ventilated. Avoid patient movement or transport out of the isolation area. If movement is necessary out of the isolation area, have the patient use a medical mask and cover any wounds/lesions on the patient’s body.

Case management should be carried out following the WHO guidelines. In addition, high-risk populations such as young children under five years of age, school children, the elderly, close contact with diphtheria cases, and healthcare workers should be vaccinated on a priority basis. A coordinated response and community engagement can support further transmission and control of the ongoing outbreak.

Prophylactic antibiotics (penicillin or erythromycin, dependent on the isolate antibiotic sensitivity) are indicated for close contacts for seven days. If the culture is positive for toxigenic Corynebacterium spp.., the contact should be treated as a case with an antibiotic course for two weeks (DAT is not needed for asymptomatic cases or cases without a pseudo membrane).

Although travelers do not have a particular risk of diphtheria infection, it is recommended that national authorities remind travelers going to areas with diphtheria outbreaks to be appropriately vaccinated in accordance with the national vaccination scheme established in each country before travel. A booster dose is recommended if more than five years have passed since their last dose.

WHO does not recommend that any general travel or trade restrictions be applied to Guinea based on the information available for this event.



Situation at a glance
On 15 August 2023, a dengue outbreak was declared by the Ministry of Public Health and Prevention in Chad. As of 1 October, there have been 1 342 suspected cases, including 41 confirmed cases reported across eight health districts in four provinces. Among the confirmed cases, one death was reported. Abéché health district in Ouaddaï province, is the current epicentre of the outbreak. The Ministry of Public Health and Prevention has initiated a number of key response activities by implementing, in collaboration with WHO and partners, the national contingency plan for dengue preparedness and response. Dengue is a viral infection transmitted to humans through the bite of infected mosquitoes. Many dengue infections produce only mild flu-like illness and over 80% of cases are asymptomatic. There is no specific treatment for dengue; however, timely detection of cases and appropriate case management are key elements of care to prevent severity and fatality of dengue. This is the first dengue outbreak reported in Chad, and the country has limited surveillance, clinical and laboratory capabilities. Given the favorable environmental conditions for mosquito spread, an ongoing humanitarian crisis due to a massive influx of refugees and returnees from Sudan and limited response capacities, WHO assesses the risk posed by this outbreak as high at the national level.
Description of the situation
On 15 August 2023, the Ministry of Public Health and Prevention of the Republic of Chad officially declared an outbreak of dengue in Abéché health district, Ouaddaï province, in the east of the country, representing the first dengue outbreak ever reported in Chad.
The declaration was made after the confirmation of dengue infection in eight out of 12 blood samples tested using real-time polymerase chain reaction (real-time PCR) at the national Biosafety and Epidemics Laboratory (LaBiEp) in N'Djamena. Subsequently, the samples were sent to the Institut Pasteur in Cameroon for confirmation, which was completed on 22 August by PCR and ELISA, confirming the presence of dengue.
As of 1 October, there have been 1 342 suspected cases, including 41 confirmed cases reported across eight health districts in four provinces. Among the confirmed cases, one death was reported (Case Fatality Ratio (CFR) among confirmed cases 2.4%).
The dengue serotype responsible for this outbreak remains unknown.
Eight districts in four provinces (NDjamena, Ouaddaï, Sila, and Wadi Fira) have reported confirmed dengue cases. Notably, Ouaddaï, the epicentre of the outbreak, has reported the highest number of confirmed cases, accounting for 31 out of the total 41 confirmed cases (76% of confirmed cases). The age group most affected by this outbreak are those between 15 to 34 years old, representing 27% of the reported confirmed cases. 
Epidemiology
Dengue is a viral infection transmitted to humans through the bite of infected mosquitoes and is found in tropical and sub-tropical climates worldwide, mostly in urban and semi-urban areas. The primary vectors that transmit the disease are Aedes aegypti mosquitoes and, to a lesser extent, Aedes albopictus.
Dengue virus (DENV) has four serotypes (DENV-1, DENV-2, DENV-3, DENV-4). Infection with one serotype provides long-term immunity to the homologous serotype but not to the other serotypes; sequential infections with a different serotype put people at greater risk for severe dengue. Many DENV infections produce only mild flu-like illness and over 80% of cases are asymptomatic.
There is no specific treatment for dengue; however, the timely detection of cases, identifying any warning signs of severe dengue infection, and appropriate case management are key elements of care to lower the CFR during an outbreak to less than 1%.
Although Chad has previously experienced outbreaks of arboviruses such as chikungunya and yellow fever, this is the first dengue outbreak ever reported in the country. Chad, including the Ouaddaï province, experienced a chikungunya outbreak in 2020, with a total of 34 052 cases recorded and one associated death.
Public health response
The Ministry of Public Health and Prevention has initiated a number of key response activities, with the support of WHO and other partners, including:

Mobilizing resources for the implementation of the national contingency plan for dengue preparedness and response, developed with WHO assistance.
Strengthening surveillance and coordinating the response, including active case finding in healthcare facilities and the community and in-depth epidemiological investigations including regularly updating the case line list.
Increasing early case detection capacity by disseminating community alert definition of cases and procuring rapid diagnostic tests (Bioline  Dengue Duo (DENGUE NS1 Ag + IgG/IgM)) for health facilities.
Ensuring effective logistics and operational support, including the transportation of samples for confirmation.
Developing standard operating procedures (SOPs) for clinical management of suspected and confirmed dengue cases, including severe dengue and ensuring inventory of existing case management kits and address gaps.
Strengthening cross-border collaboration and implementing prevention and vector control measures in border areas.
Strengthening entomological surveillance, including aquatic and adult stages of the vectors, and characterizing vector bionomics.
Implementing effective vector control measures as part of integrated vector management.
Strengthening community mobilization and commitment to disseminate key information on transmission and control to the population.
WHO risk assessment
This is the first dengue outbreak reported in Chad, and the country lacks the necessary public health preparedness and response capacities.
Community cases are likely underreported because dengue is unknown to the general public and clinicians are not yet sensitised to its presentation, which is sometimes confused with those of other common febrile infections, making early diagnosis challenging, particularly in settings with lack of laboratory facilities for testing.
There is a high risk of spread due to the presence of mosquitoes in large, densely populated cities in eastern Chad near the Sudan border, with a tropical climate, and poor sanitation conditions suitable for mosquito development.
The province of Ouaddaï, which borders Sudan, is the epicentre of the outbreak and is also the province most affected by the ongoing humanitarian crisis due to a massive influx of refugees and returnees from Sudan. According to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the number of refugees in the Ouaddaï province is currently more than 400 000.
The movement of returning Sudanese refugees and Chadian nationals has the potential to spread the outbreak to new provinces and across the border.
Based on the information available for this event, WHO assesses the risk posed by this outbreak as high at the national level, moderate at regional level, and low at global level.
WHO advice
The proximity of mosquito breeding sites to human habitation is a significant risk factor for dengue virus infection. The prevention and control of dengue depend on effective vector control. Vector control activities should focus on all areas where there is a risk of human-vector contact (place of residence, workplaces, schools, and hospitals). WHO promotes a strategic approach known as Integrated Vector Management (IVM) to control Aedes species, the vector of dengue. IVM should be enhanced to remove potential breeding sites, reduce vector populations, and minimize individual exposure. This should involve vector control strategies for larvae and adults (i.e. environmental management and source reduction), especially of water storage practices, and include covering, draining and cleaning household water storage containers on a weekly basis, applying larvicide in non-potable waters using WHO-prequalified larvicides at correct dosages, distribution of insecticide-treated nets (ITNs) for fever/dengue inpatients to contain spread of virus from health facilities, as well as strategies for protecting people and households. Indoor space spraying (fogging) is another approach for rapid containment of dengue-infected mosquitoes but may be challenging to deliver in densely populated areas of camps.
Personal protective measures during outdoor activities include topical application of repellents to exposed skin or treatment of clothing, and wearing long-sleeved shirts and pants. Indoor protection can include household insecticide aerosol products, or mosquito coils. Window and door screens can reduce the probability of mosquitoes entering the house. Insecticide-treated nets offer good protection against mosquito bites while sleeping during the day. Since Aedes mosquitoes (the primary vector for transmission) are active at dawn and dusk, personal protective measures are recommended, particularly at these times of day, both in residential areas and also at places of work and schools for children.
Entomological surveillance should be undertaken to assess the breeding potential of Aedes mosquitoes in containers and monitor insecticide resistance to help select the most effective insecticide-based interventions. There is no specific treatment for dengue infection, but early detection and access to appropriate healthcare for case management can reduce mortality. Case surveillance should continue to be enhanced in all affected areas and nationwide. Where feasible, resources should be allocated to strengthen a sample referral mechanism for the confirmation and sub-typing of the dengue virus.
Communities play a major role in the success and sustainability of vector control activities. While coordination among many stakeholders is required, vector control is critically dependent on ensuring that communities are aware of the risk of infection and know which measures to take to protect themselves. Community engagement and mobilization involve working with local residents to improve vector control and build resilience against future disease outbreaks. Where appropriate participatory community-based approaches are in place, communities are supported to take responsibility for and implement vector control. Participatory community-based approaches aim to ensure that healthy behaviours become part of the social fabric and that communities take ownership of vector control at both inside and outside households.

Based on the information available for this event, WHO does not recommend travel or trade restrictions be applied to Chad.



Situation at a glance
From the 12 to 15 September 2023, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India, reported six laboratory-confirmed Nipah virus cases, including two deaths, in Kozhikode district, Kerala. Aside from the first case, whose source of infection is unknown, the other cases were family and hospital contacts of the first case. As of 27 September 2023,1288 contacts of the confirmed cases were traced, including high-risk contacts and healthcare workers, who are under quarantine and monitoring for 21 days. Since 12 September, 387 samples have been tested, of which six cases were positive for Nipah virus infection, and all remaining samples tested negative. Since 15 September, no new cases have been detected. This is the sixth outbreak of Nipah virus in India since 2001. Nipah virus infection, a zoonotic illness, is spread to humans through contact with infected animals such as bats and pigs. Additionally, direct contact with an infected individual can also lead to transmission, although this route is less common. Those affected by Nipah virus infection may experience severe symptoms, including acute respiratory infection and fatal encephalitis. The only way to reduce or prevent infection in people is by raising awareness about the risk factors and preventive measures to protect themselves. Case management should focus on providing patients with supportive care measures and intensive support for severe respiratory and neurologic complications. State and national authorities activated a multisectoral coordination and response mechanism to contain the spread of the outbreak including enhanced surveillance and contact tracing, laboratory testing of suspected cases and high-risk contacts, hospital preparedness for case management, infection prevention and control (IPC), risk communication and community engagement.
Description of the situation
Between 12 and 15 September 2023, a total of six laboratory-confirmed cases of Nipah virus infection including two deaths were reported by the State Government of Kerala. All confirmed cases were males within the age range of 9 to 45 years old and were reported within the Kozhikode district of Kerala.

The first case whose source of infection is unknown, had pneumonia and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and was admitted at a hospital in late August 2023. He died a few days after admission.  The other five confirmed cases were close contacts of the first case including two family members and contacts at the hospital where the first case was treated and died. The second death occurred in an individual who accompanied another patient to the hospital where the first case was being treated. He died after presenting with symptoms of pneumonia.

As of 27 September 2023, 1288 contacts of the confirmed cases have been traced, including high-risk contacts and healthcare workers who treated the confirmed cases and processed their samples. All identified contacts are under quarantine for a period of 21 days. As of 27 September 2023, the four cases remain clinically stable.

The Government’s response measures included declaring containment zones in nine villages in the Kozhikode district with movement restrictions, social distancing, and mandatory mask-wearing in public spaces. The government restricted major public events in Kozhikode district until 1 October 2023. Alerts were issued to neighbouring districts and states for enhanced surveillance.

According to the National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune, the virus found in Kerala has been identified as the Indian Genotype or I-Genotype and is similar to the Nipah virus strain found in Bangladesh.

Epidemiology
Nipah virus infection is an emerging bat-borne zoonotic disease transmitted to humans through infected animals (such as bats and pigs) or food contaminated with saliva, urine, and excreta of infected animals. It can also be transmitted directly from person to person through close contact with an infected person (although this represents a less common transmission route).

Nipah virus infection in humans causes a range of clinical presentations including acute respiratory infection and fatal encephalitis.  The case-fatality rates in outbreaks across Bangladesh, India, Malaysia, and Singapore typically range from 40% to 100%. As of now, there are no available effective therapies or vaccines for this disease.

The current outbreak is the third Nipah virus outbreak in Kozhikode district, Kerala, the fourth outbreak in Kerala state since 2018 and the sixth outbreak in India. Similar to the previous outbreak in 2018 in Kerala, this outbreak started with the first case and subsequent clustering of cases in family contacts and likely nosocomial transmission in hospitals. In the WHO South-East Asia Region, only Bangladesh and India have reported Nipah virus outbreaks.

Public health response
The following public health response measures were implemented by the Department of Health and Family Welfare, State Government of Kerala, with support from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India, and its institutions; Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune, and National Institute of Epidemiology, Chennai.

Coordination: Multiple central multi-disciplinary teams were mobilized by the Department of Health & Family Welfare, Department of Health Research as well as Department of Animal Husbandry to support the State and District administration in containment and mitigation measures. A total of 19 core committees were created and tasked with various response measures including surveillance, sample testing, contact tracing, patient transportation, case management, logistics and supplies, training and capacity building, risk communication and community engagement, psychosocial support and animal husbandry. A control room with a call center was activated in the district to coordinate the response activities.

Surveillance and contact tracing: As part of community-based surveillance activities, active house-to-house surveillance was carried out by the district health authorities in the containment zones declared. A total of 53,708 houses have been surveyed as of 27 September 2023. As of 27 September, 1288 contacts including high-risk contacts were identified and quarantine with follow up exercise ongoing. All high-risk contacts were tested. Containment zones were declared in nine villages in Kozhikode district with movement restrictions, social distancing and mandatory mask-wearing in public spaces. The government restricted major public events in Kozhikode district until 1 October 2023. Alerts have been issued to neighbouring districts and states for enhanced surveillance.

Laboratory testing: Laboratory testing of suspected cases as well as environmental and animal samples is being conducted at the Regional Viral Research and Diagnostic Laboratory network lab at the Government Medical College (GMC), Kozhikode; Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) Mobile BSL-3 lab; Field unit of NIV at Alappuzha as well as NIV, Pune. As of 27 September 2023, no environmental/animal samples (including bats) have tested positive for Nipah virus.

Health facility preparedness: Emergency departments have been equipped to handle any suspected cases and respond to emergencies. Isolation rooms and intensive care units (ICU) are being kept ready to treat suspected cases, where required. The State has earmarked isolation rooms, ICU beds, and ventilators to mount surge capacity when needed. Suspected and confirmed cases are being managed at designated health facilities. For patient transport, dedicated ambulances have been mobilized.

Infection prevention and control: The State Government has initiated training of healthcare workers on infection prevention and control (IPC). Adequate stocks of Personal Protective Equipment (PPEs) have been made available to health care workers and IPC practices are being strictly adhered to and audited.

Logistic management: Adequate stocks of PPEs, drugs and other requisite logistics are being provided by the State Government.

Dead body management: Arrangement has also been made for the transfer and management of dead bodies by the State Government in compliance with the standard protocol and IPC precautions.

Risk communication and community engagement: Information education and communication activities through different modalities (including regular press releases) have been initiated. Further, audio spots and video bytes by expert doctors are being issued. Infodemic management strategies are currently being implemented with strict action taken against fake news. A call center to provide psychosocial care has also been established by the State Government.

Animal Sector: Samples of bats, animal droppings, and half-eaten fruits were collected on 15 September from the village where the first case lived, in a 300-acre (121-hectare) forest which is home to several bat species. All samples tested negative for Nipah virus.

Public health response measures were implemented in accordance with the guidelines developed by the State Government and Government of India with support from WHO and partners during the 2018 Nipah virus outbreak in Kerala state.

WHO risk assessment
This is the sixth outbreak in India since 2001 when the first outbreak was reported in Siliguri town, West Bengal (66 cases, CFR: 68%). Subsequently, five outbreaks have been reported- Nadia district, West Bengal (5 cases; CFR: 100%), Kozhikode and Malappuram, Kerala in 2018 (23 cases including confirmed and probable; CFR: 91%), Ernakulum, Kerala in 2019 (a single case who survived) and Kozhikode, Kerala in 2021 (one case, CFR: 100%).

The following factors may contribute to the risk associated with this outbreak:

The exposure of the first case in this outbreak remains unknown;
The presence of a bat population which has been reported to harbor Nipah virus and therefore acts as a potential source of infection;
High reported case fatality rate (33.3%) and high number of contacts; and
The absence of Nipah virus-specific therapeutics and vaccines.
At the same time, the current outbreak is not entirely unexpected and is the third outbreak in Kozhikode district and fourth in the state of Kerala. Current cases are clustered and epidemiologically linked to the first case, and cases are localized to Kozhikode district. Public health teams and health care workers in Kozhikode have prior experience in managing outbreaks of Nipah virus infection. The State Government has rapidly established response measures to contain the spread of the outbreak and through enhanced surveillance and contact tracing measures, 1288 contacts have been identified and are under monitoring. High-risk contacts are being tested.

WHO advice
In the absence of a vaccine or licensed treatment available for Nipah virus, the only way to reduce or prevent infection in people is by raising awareness of the risk factors and educating people about the measures they can take to reduce exposure to Nipah virus infection. Case management should focus on the delivery of supportive care measures to patients. Intensive supportive care is recommended to treat severe respiratory and neurologic complications.

Public health educational messages should focus on:

Reducing the risk of bat-to-human transmission

Freshly collected date palm juice should be boiled, and fruits should be thoroughly washed and peeled before consumption. Fruits with signs of bat bites should be discarded. Areas where bats are known to roost should be avoided. The risk of international transmission via fruit or fruit products (such as raw date palm juice) contaminated with urine or saliva from infected fruit bats can be prevented by washing them thoroughly and peeling them before consumption.

Reducing the risk of animal-to-human transmission

Natural infection in domestic animals has been described in farming pigs, horses, and domestic and feral cats. Gloves and other protective clothing should be worn while handling sick animals or their tissues and during slaughtering and culling procedures. As much as possible, people should avoid being in contact with infected pigs. In endemic areas, when establishing new pig farms, consideration should be given to the presence of fruit bats in the area and in general, pig feed and pig sheds should be protected against bats when feasible. Samples taken from animals with suspected Nipah virus infection should be handled by trained staff working in suitably equipped laboratories.

Reducing the risk of human-to-human transmission

Close unprotected physical contact with Nipah virus infected people should be avoided. Regular hand washing should be carried out after caring for or visiting sick people. Health care workers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed infection, or those handling their specimens, including trained staff working in suitably equipped laboratories, should always implement infection prevention and control standard precautions as well as contact and droplet precautions when providing care or working in the rooms of patients with suspected or confirmed Nipah virus and when handling/managing linens or waste from patients with Nipah virus. Case management should focus on the delivery of supportive care measures to patients. Intensive supportive care is recommended to treat severe respiratory and neurologic complications.  Safe burial practices are required for all confirmed and suspected Nipah virus infected cases.

Infection prevention and control

In health care settings, patients who are suspected of Nipah virus should be isolated in well-ventilated single rooms with dedicated patient equipment and toileting. Patients with suspected Nipah virus should not be placed in cohort rooms. Health care workers interacting with patients with Nipah virus should use contact and droplet precautions when caring for patients with Nipah virus. Contact, droplet, and airborne precautions should be used, including placement of a patient in an airborne isolation room when aerosol-generating medical procedures are performed. If airborne isolation rooms are not available, a well-ventilated single room with windows open if using natural ventilation with doors to corridors closed. Cleaning and disinfection of all surfaces in patient rooms housing suspected or confirmed patients with Nipah virus should occur at least once daily. After cleaning with soap and water, a 0.5% sodium hypochlorite solution disinfectant should be applied to surfaces, remaining untouched for 5 minutes contact time. Immediate cleaning and disinfection, as well as high touch surface cleaning, should be performed whenever a spill of blood or body fluid occurs.  Health facilities should be equipped with enhanced water, sanitation and hygiene services to meet the needs of staff, patients and caregivers. Safe waste management practices should be adhered to by the health care facilities.

WHO infection prevention and control advice when caring for patients with Nipah virus infection is currently under review and is pending update.

WHO advises against the application of any travel or trade restrictions on India based on the current information available on this event.



Situation at a glance
The Ministry of Health and Population (Ministère de la Santé et de la Population - MSP) of the Republic of the Congo, declared on 17 July 2023 a suspected triple outbreak of gastroenteritis, with typhoid fever, shigellosis, and cholera as probable causes. Since the first case was reported on 28 June 2023, and as of 29 August 2023, a total of 2389 suspected cases have been reported, including 52 deaths (overall Case Fatality Rate (CFR) 2.2%). Laboratory analyses performed by the National Public Health Laboratory, identified 83 cases of Shigella, 22 of Salmonella Typhi (S. Typhi) and 21 cases of Vibrio cholerae with toxigenicity testing of the strain not performed. The city of Dolisie, the capital of Niari Department in the western part of the country is the epicentre of this outbreak. With WHO support, the MSP has activated a multisectoral coordination mechanism, strengthening surveillance, laboratory and clinical care capacities, and implementing decontamination and risk communication activities. An in-depth epidemiological investigation is also being led by the MSP. WHO assesses the risk posed by this triple outbreak as high at the national level, moderate at the regional level and low at the global level.
Description of the situation
On 14 July 2023, the Ministry of Health and Population of the Republic of the Congo reported 1384 cases whose dominant symptomatology was fever (39°C and 40°C), headaches, abdominal pain, diarrhoea, vomiting, and fatigue.

On 17 July 2023, the MSP officially declared a suspected triple outbreak of gastroenteritis, with typhoid fever, shigellosis, and cholera as probable causes.

The first case of the outbreak was reported on 28 June 2023. Since then, and as of 29 August 2023, a total of 2389 suspected cases have been reported, including 52 deaths (overall CFR 2.2%). Suspected typhoid fever cases accounted for 50.2% (n=1200) of all cases, followed by shigellosis (46.9%; n=1120) and cholera (2.9%; n=69).

Eighty-eight (3.7%) of the suspected cases have undergone emergency surgery due to an intestinal perforation, a complication known to occur in untreated typhoid fever.

The city of Dolisie - the capital of Niari Department with a population of more than 110 000 inhabitants - is the current epicentre of this outbreak, with 2178 suspected cases (91.2% of all cases) and 33 deaths (CFR 1.5%) reported for all three infectious diseases combined.

Figure 1. Distribution of suspected cases of typhoid fever, shigellosis, and cholera by date of reporting, Dolise, Niari Department, 28 June - 29 August 2023 (n=2178). 

Since the beginning of this outbreak, Dolisie has registered an overflow of health facilities with more than 600 suspected cases admitted during July-August. A reduction in the number of admitted patients has been observed since September.

Five other departments in the Republic of Congo (Bouenza, Brazzaville, Kouilou, Pointe-Noire and Pool) have also reported suspected cases.

Of the 2071 cases (86.7%) with information on age and sex, 51.6% (n=1068) were females, and the most affected age group was 11-20 years (n=674; 32.5%), followed by the 0-10 age group (n=506; 24.4%) and the 21-30 age group (n=403; 19.4%).

Figure 2. Age and sex distribution among suspected cases (n=2071).

The available isolation results from the National Public Health Laboratory (LNSP) are distributed as follows (the number of samples tested is not known):

Eighty-three confirmed cases of Shigella (flexneri & dysenteriae). The most affected age group is patients between 5 and 30 years old, representing 64% (53/83) of laboratory-confirmed cases of Shigella.
Twenty-two confirmed cases of Salmonella Typhi. The most affected age group is patients between 5 and 30 years old, representing 59% (13/22) of laboratory-confirmed cases of typhoid fever.
Twenty-one confirmed cases of Vibrio cholerae, including 11 co-infections with Shigella, and one co-infection with S. typhi. The serogroup typing showed serogroup O1 serotype Inaba for eight out of nine samples for which serotyping was conducted. However, given the prolonged absence of reported cholera in the country (the last documented outbreak was in 2016) and the absence of epidemiological links to other ongoing cholera outbreaks (i.e. in the neighbouring countries of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Cameroon), toxigenicity testing of the strain is still required to ascertain confirmation of cholera aetiology in accordance with WHO and The Global Task Force on Cholera Control (GTFCC) standards. The most affected age group for confirmed cholera cases is between 5 and 30 years old, representing 76% (16/21) of laboratory-confirmed cases.
The results of the antibiogram conducted on 78 samples of stool analysed, indicated a resistance and/or reduced susceptibility to carbapenems, third generation cephalosporins, and quinolones in several of the reported isolates of Shigella and Salmonella, while most of S. Typhi isolates are reported to be susceptible to ciprofloxacin (the number of the antibiogram results by pathogen and drug is unknown).

Epidemiology
Cholera is an acute enteric infection caused by ingesting the bacteria Vibrio cholerae present in contaminated water or food. It is mainly linked to insufficient access to safe drinking water and inadequate sanitation. It is an extremely virulent disease that can cause severe acute watery diarrhoea resulting in high morbidity and mortality, and can spread rapidly, depending on the frequency of exposure, the exposed population and the setting. Cholera affects both children and adults and can be fatal if untreated. The incubation period is between 12 hours and five days after ingestion of contaminated food or water. Most people infected with V. cholerae do not develop any symptoms, although the bacteria are present in their faeces for 1-10 days after infection and are shed back into the environment, potentially infecting other people. The majority of people who develop symptoms have mild or moderate symptoms, while a minority develop acute watery diarrhoea and vomiting with severe dehydration. Cholera is an easily treatable disease. Most people can be treated successfully through prompt administration of Oral Rehydration Solution (ORS).

After decades of progress against cholera, an upsurge has been recorded in several countries since 2021. From 1 January 2023 to 15 August 2023, at least 28 countries have reported cholera cases, compared with 16 countries in the same period of 2022. The WHO African Region is the most affected region with 16 countries reporting cholera cases since the beginning of 2023. In Congo, from 1997 to 2016, a total of six cholera outbreaks have been reported, with the last occurred in Mpouya (Plateaux Department), with 18 cases including three deaths (CFR 16.7%).

Shigellosis is a gastrointestinal infection caused by one of four species of Shigella bacteria (Shigella sonnei, S. flexneri, S. boydii and S. dysenteriae). It is found in the intestinal tract of infected people and can be transmitted through the faecal-oral route by direct or indirect contact (e.g., through flies) with faeces from an infected person, fomites, consumption of contaminated food or water and person-to-person contact. Sustained sexual transmission has become an important component of Shigella species epidemiology. Humans are the only reservoir and can excrete bacteria in their stools for weeks after a dysenteric episode. Adequate antibiotic treatment can reduce the carriage status. Asymptomatic carriers can also contribute to the spread of the disease. Fluoroquinolones, cephalosporins, and azithromycin are recommended to treat more severe cases with underlying conditions or to limit transmission.

Typhoid fever is a life-threatening infection caused by the bacterium Salmonella Typhi. It is usually spread through contaminated food or water. Once Salmonella Typhi bacteria are ingested, they multiply and spread into the bloodstream. Symptoms include prolonged fever, fatigue, headache, nausea, abdominal pain, and constipation or diarrhoea. Some patients may have a rash. Severe cases may lead to serious complications, such as intestinal perforation, or even death. Patients can be treated with antibiotics although increasing resistance to different types of antibiotics is making treatment more complicated. WHO has prequalified two typhoid conjugate vaccines since December 2017 and are being introduced into childhood immunization programs in typhoid-endemic countries.

Public health response
WHO is supporting the MSP in conducting an in-depth epidemiological investigation of this triple outbreak to better characterize it, particularly the epidemiological profiles of cases of intestinal perforation and deaths.
A national integrated response plan to shigellosis outbreaks, typhoid fever, and cholera has been developed.
The MSP activated multisectoral coordination mechanisms at the national level and in the departments of Niari, Kouilou and Bouenza.
WHO is supporting the MSP in strengthening surveillance in healthcare facilities and communities where the active search for suspected cases is underway. A mobile laboratory was also deployed in Dolisie.
Environmental monitoring with water quality testing and decontamination of affected water sources is ongoing.
Risk communication and community engagement with home visits intensified in Dolisie has been implemented, including hygiene promotion activities.
The MSP has strengthened clinical care capacity by deploying additional surgeons to operate on patients with perforations and developing a care plan based on antibiotic susceptibility patterns.
WHO risk assessment
Although no epidemiological baseline data is available for previous years, the high number of suspected cases and deaths of suspected typhoid fever and Shigella reported within two months, led to an overflow of health facilities as well as the high number of patients reported that have undergone surgical intervention due to intestinal perforation, are considered unusual.

Although sporadic cholera outbreaks have been reported in the Republic of Congo, the city of Dolisie, the current epicentre, has not previously recorded such an outbreak. Cholera outbreaks are ongoing in the neighbouring countries of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Cameroon, but no epidemiolocal link has been identified. So far, no disease spread to other countries has been reported linked to this outbreak.

WHO assesses the risk at the national level as high. This is based on the rapid outbreak dynamic and high morbidity and mortality of this outbreak, the strain on the health care system and high risk of healthcare–associated infections, the limited access to safe drinking water in Dolisie, the poor water and sanitation infrastructure, poor hygiene practices, and the observed limitations in the rapid detection, confirmation, and management of suspected cases. The limited information available on laboratory confirmations and implicated antimicrobial resistance (AMR) profiles further complicates the tailoring of an effective public health response. Regional and global levels of risk are considered moderate and low, respectively.

WHO advice
The outbreak highlights the importance of public health measures to prevent the spread of resistant and non-resistant pathogens. Since this outbreak involves multiple Gram-negative bacteria, special attention should be paid to the possible presence of extended-spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBLs) and carbapenemases, as they can spread horizontally between species and further complicate treatment. Additionally, although S. typhi isolates are reported to be susceptible to ciprofloxacin, reported resistance to nalidixic acid might indicate reduced susceptibility to fluoroquinolones.

While emerging resistance in S. typhi would indeed complicate treatment, typhoid fever remains common in places with poor sanitation and a lack of safe drinking water. Access to safe water and adequate sanitation, hygiene among food handlers and typhoid vaccination are the main and most important recommendations. WHO recommends typhoid vaccination in response to confirmed outbreaks of typhoid fever and recommends vaccination should be considered for travellers to typhoid-endemic areas. Further, where the typhoid conjugate vaccine (TCV) is licensed, WHO recommends TCV (among the available typhoid vaccines) as the preferred vaccine in view of its improved immunological properties. Typhoid vaccination should be implemented in the context of other efforts to control the disease. Also, seeing how quickly S. typhi can acquire new resistance mechanisms, WHO recommends strengthening surveillance of antimicrobial resistance to monitor known resistance, detect new and emerging resistance, control its spread and share the surveillance data locally and internationally in a timely manner.

For surveillance, prompt detection and reporting of cases of bloody diarrhoea is the essential first step to monitoring endemic shigellosis and controlling epidemic shigellosis. Laboratory surveillance should be used to isolate and identify Shigella and perform antimicrobial susceptibility testing. State Parties are encouraged to refer to WHO guidance documents on foodborne disease surveillance and response.

WHO recommends improving access to clean water and sanitation to prevent cholera transmission. Strengthening surveillance, especially at the community level, is advised. Appropriate case management, including improving access to care by establishing cholera treatment centers and oral rehydration points in the community, should be implemented in outbreak-affected areas to reduce mortality. Oral cholera vaccines (OCV) should be used in conjunction with improved water and sanitation to control cholera outbreaks and for prevention in areas known to be at high risk for cholera. It is necessary to ensure that countries are prepared to quickly detect and respond to any cholera outbreak to reduce the risk of it spreading to new areas.

WHO recommends infection prevention and control, water, sanitation, and hygiene, waste management and food safety practices at health facilities be closely monitored and improved where gaps are identified, particularly for facilities experiencing surges of patients. Contact precautions, including isolation of cases, should be enabled in health facilities for all patients who present with acute onset of gastroenteric symptoms, particularly for those experiencing incontinence. Efforts should be made to avoid cohort isolation of patients with different gastroenteric infections. Health facilities should closely monitor for instances where inpatients who are admitted for other reasons develop symptoms of gastroenteric infection beyond 48 hours admission as an inpatient, as this is indicative of potential healthcare-associated infection.

WHO advises against applying any travel or trade restrictions based on the current information available on this event.



Situation at a glance
On 12 September 2023, local public health authorities in France identified a cluster of 10 cases with suspected botulism, including one death. As of 14 September 2023, the National IHR Focal Point for France has notified WHO of a total of 15 cases of suspected botulism, including one death, reported in Bordeaux and Ile-de-France. The epidemiological investigations indicated that the source of infection is the consumption of homemade preserved sardines , on different dates, at the same restaurant in Bordeaux during the week of 4–10 September 2023. The food item was made at the restaurant for consumption on premises. Due to the incubation period of up to eight days and the restaurant attracting international visitors during the Rugby World Cup, there is a possibility that additional cases among international visitors may be reported in France, or possibly outside France as travellers returned home, until 18 September.
Description of the situation

On 12 September 2023, local public health authorities in France identified a cluster of 10 cases with suspected botulism, including one death.

As of 14 September 2023, the National IHR Focal Point for France has notified a total of 15 cases of suspected botulism, including one death, reported in Bordeaux and Ile-de-France. Of these 15 cases, 10 have been hospitalised, with eight patients being admitted to an Intensive Care Unit. Fourteen out of the 15 cases are reported among foreign citizens identified from six countries in addition to France. These include Canada, Germany, Greece, Ireland, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the United States of America. All suspected cases consumed the same product (sardines in jars) on different dates at the same restaurant in Bordeaux during the week of 4–10 September 2023. The epidemiological investigations indicated that the source of infection is the consumption of homemade preserved sardines. The food item was produced and served at the restaurant.

Epidemiology
Botulism is a serious neurological condition caused by a very potent toxin produced by the bacterium  Clostridium botulinum . It develops particularly in poorly preserved foods. Human botulism may refer to foodborne botulism, infant botulism, wound botulism, and inhalation botulism or other types of intoxication.

Foodborne botulism is a serious, potentially fatal disease. It is an intoxication caused by ingestion of potent neurotoxins—the botulinum toxins—formed in contaminated foods. Person-to-person transmission of botulism does not occur. The manifestations, or symptoms, of intoxication can vary, and  is characterized by descending, flaccid paralysis that can cause respiratory failure. Early symptoms include marked fatigue, weakness and vertigo, usually followed by blurred vision, dry mouth and difficulty in swallowing and speaking. Vomiting, diarrhoea, constipation and abdominal swelling may also occur. The disease can progress to weakness in the neck and arms, after which the respiratory muscles and muscles of the lower body are affected. There is no fever and no loss of consciousness. Symptoms usually appear from several hours up to 8 days following consumption of contaminated food.

Although botulism outbreaks are relatively rare, they are considered public health emergencies that require rapid recognition to identify the disease source, distinguish outbreak types (between natural, accidental or deliberate), prevent additional cases and effectively administer treatment to affected patients. Successful treatment depends significantly on early diagnosis and the rapid administration of the botulinum antitoxin and intensive respiratory care.

Incidence of botulism is low, but the mortality rate is high if prompt diagnosis and appropriate, immediate treatment is not given. The disease can be fatal in 5% to 10% of cases.

Public health response
On 11 September, food and serum samples were shipped to the French National Reference Center for Anaerobic Bacteria and Botulism, Institute Pasteur, Paris , and botulinum toxin was confirmed in serum samples and in a food sample (sardines) on 14 September 2023.  
The local health authorities inspected the restaurant and all products prepared by the restaurant have been recalled. On 13 September, the local health authorities held a press conference and informed the local healthcare professionals.
The national health authorities have issued risk communication advice to sensitize the health care workers about the symptomatology and treatment.
Information on cases reported among citizens from foreign countries have been shared with the relevant health authorities in those countries.
WHO risk assessment
Local investigations have identified an estimated 25 persons through credit card receipts who have been exposed (i.e., who likely consumed the suspect food item). The exposure occurred at local level and measures have been implemented to eliminate the source of infection including the removal of the suspected food item, which was not distributed outside the venue. However, given the ranging incubation period of botulism—up to eight days—and that not all customers of the restaurant in Bordeaux may have been identified despite efforts, further cases linked to this event may still occur. This outbreak has occurred at the same time as the Rugby World Cup held from the week of 4 September 2023 attracting followers and rugby teams from all over the world. 

Due to the incubation period up to eight days and the restaurant attracting international visitors, there is a possibility that additional cases among international visitors may be reported either from France or outside of France until 18 September.
WHO advice
Prevention of foodborne botulism is based on good practice in food preparation particularly during heating/sterilization and hygiene. Foodborne botulism may be prevented by the inactivation of the bacterium and its spores in heat-sterilized (for example, retorted) or canned products, or by inhibiting bacterial growth and toxin production in other products. The vegetative forms of bacteria can be destroyed by boiling, but the spores can remain viable after boiling even for several hours. However, the spores can be killed by very high temperature treatments such as (commercial) canning.

Commercial heat pasteurization (including vacuum packed pasteurized products and hot smoked products) may not be sufficient to kill all spores and therefore the safety of these products must be based on preventing bacterial growth and toxin production. Refrigeration temperatures combined with salt content and/or acidic conditions will prevent the growth of the bacteria and formation of toxin.

The neurotoxins themselves are heat-labile and will be destroyed within minutes at temperatures above 80°C; consequently, only foods improperly processed in which the bacteria or the spores survive, pose a risk.

The WHO five keys to safer food serve as the basis for educational programmes to train food handlers and educate the consumers. They are especially important in preventing food poisoning.

The five keys are:

keep clean
separate raw and cooked
cook thoroughly
keep food at safe temperatures
use safe water and raw materials.



Situation at a glance
As of 11 September 2023, a total of 166 cases of legionellosis, including 23 deaths, have been reported from Poland. Legionellosis, more commonly known as Legionnaires' disease, is a pneumonia-like illness, caused by a bacterium, that varies in severity from mild to a severe illness and sometimes fatal form of pneumonia. This observed increase in confirmed cases, and associated hospitalizations and deaths seen since mid-August, is unusual, considering that the number of cases is higher than the annual number reported in Poland since 2016. Polish health authorities are coordinating cluster investigation activities, active case finding to identify additional cases, and public health activities to prevent transmission and limit the emergence of new cases, through preventive control measures. Since 7 September, no new cases have been reported, although the infection source has not yet been identified. Investigations are still ongoing to find the source of the outbreak. Most people develop Legionnaires' disease by inhaling the bacteria from water or soil. To date there has been no reported direct human-to-human transmission.
Description of the situation
On 18 August 2023, public health authorities in Rzeszów, Poland, announced the detection of a cluster of 158 suspected community-acquired pneumonia cases, including 15 laboratory-confirmed cases of legionellosis among patients admitted to several hospitals in Rzeszów.

Between 18 August and 11 September 2023, a total of 166 laboratory-confirmed cases, all hospitalized, and 23 associated deaths (CFR of 14%) have been reported. Most cases, 67% (n=112), were recorded in the city of Rzeszów, 23% (n=38) of cases in Rzeszów county, and 10% (n=16) cases in other locations.

Figure 1: Geographic distribution of confirmed Legionellosis cases in Poland between 18 August and 11 September 2023.



Preliminary results from an ongoing epidemiological investigation indicate that the first cases developed symptoms on 30 July, while most cases developed symptoms between 12-16 August. Adults between 60 and 90 years are the most affected age group. The most recently reported case has an onset date of 29 August. All 23 related deaths had underlying comorbidities and were between the ages of 53 and 98 (11 females and 12 males).

Figure 2: Number of confirmed Legionellosis cases reported in Rzeszow by Epidemic week



Laboratory results

Only hospitalized cases are tested for Legionella spp. The majority of the cases were confirmed through urine antigen tests and 11 cases were confirmed through respiratory samples by PCR. Culture and sequencing were not possible as the cases were treated with antibiotics.

Between 18 August to 11 September 2023, a total of 379 facility inspections were carried out. A total of 222 samples of hot and cold water were taken and investigations are ongoing. 

Epidemiology
Legionellosis is an infection caused by Legionella bacteria. The Legionella bacteria can cause a mild illness, Pontiac fever, non-pneumonic form of the disease, and Legionnaires’ disease, a severe pneumonia form of illness that can be fatal. Most people catch Legionnaires' disease by inhaling the bacteria from water or soil.

Legionnaires’ disease, the pneumonic form, has an incubation period of 2 to 10 days (but up to 16 days have been recorded in some outbreaks). It is an important cause of community- and hospital-acquired pneumonia, and although uncommon, Legionnaires’ disease may cause outbreaks of public health significance. Initially, symptoms are fever, mild cough, loss of appetite, headache, malaise and lethargy, with some patients also experiencing muscle pain, diarrhoea and confusion. The severity of Legionnaires’ disease ranges from a mild cough to rapidly fatal pneumonia. Untreated Legionnaires’ disease usually worsens during the first week.

Mortality from Legionnaires’ disease depends on the severity of the disease, the use of antibiotic treatment, the setting where Legionella was acquired, and whether the patient has underlying conditions, including immunosuppression. The death rate may be as high as 40–80% in untreated immunosuppressed patients and can be reduced to 5–30% through appropriate case management, depending on the severity of the clinical signs and symptoms. Overall, the death rate is usually between 5–10%.

Public health response
Meetings of the crisis staff at the Mayor of Rzeszów are held daily.
Water samples were collected from the water supply system, residences of the sick, healthcare facilities, cooling towers, and installations in buildings located in Rzeszów, the Rzeszów poviat, and the Ropczyce and Sędziszów poviat.
An epidemiological investigation, including interviews with patients or relatives, is underway to determine the source of infection.
Mapping all positive cases, water sampling sites, and cooling towers is underway.
Public fountains, public water sprays, and other public water sources have been shut down temporarily.
Rzeszów Municipal Water and Sewage Company carried out the routine disinfection of the water supply in the city of Rzeszów and adjacent towns on 27 August 2023.
Health care units and long-term care facilities have been instructed to carry out additional inspections of their water systems.
Public health advice has been developed and shared across multiple channels.
WHO risk assessment
Legionellosis varies in severity from a mild febrile illness to a severe and sometimes fatal form of pneumonia and is caused by exposure to Legionella species found in contaminated water and potting mixes. Outbreaks of Legionella have been linked to poorly maintained water systems, particularly cooling towers or evaporative condensers associated with air conditioning and industrial cooling, hot and cold-water systems in public and private buildings, and whirlpool spas.

Infection can also occur by aspiration of contaminated water or ice, particularly in susceptible hospital patients. To date, there is no reported human-to-human transmission. Legionnaires' disease requires treatment with antibiotics, and currently, no vaccine is available for Legionnaires' disease.

Sporadic outbreaks of Legionnaires' disease have been reported previously in Poland. Between 2017 and 2021, Poland reported between 38 to 74 cases of Legionnaires’ disease annually to the European Surveillance System (TESSy). In 2022, this increased to 111 reported cases.

Robust surveillance and response activities are being implemented during the current outbreak, and case numbers have been reduced. Nonetheless, without an identified source of Legionella bacteria, there is a continued risk of developing Legionellosis for people working or living in the affected areas. Older adults, smokers, and people with weakened immune systems are particularly susceptible to the disease.

Travel-associated Legionnaires’ disease (TALD) is a frequent phenomenon, with, on average, about 20% of the cases of legionellosis detected in Europe considered to be travel-associated. The outbreak is reported in the south-eastern city of Rzeszów, the main hub for humanitarian aid for Ukraine and the transit hub for international military support for Ukraine; therefore, TALD may be expected in people visiting Rzeszów.

According to the European Center for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC), in 2021, the EU/EEA witnessed the highest annual notification rate of Legionnaires’ disease, with 2.4 cases per 100 000 population. The cause of the increased reported incidence observed during that period in Europe remains unclear. Legionnaires’ disease is a notifiable disease in the EU, and the events are closely followed up through ECDC and European Legionnaires’ Disease Surveillance Network (ELDSNet).

WHO advice
WHO recommends the continuation of laboratory analyses, case identification and clinical care, contact tracing, outbreak investigation to identify the source(s), implementation of measures to prevent further infections, and enhancement of Infection, Prevention and Control (IPC) measures. IPC measures in health facilities have been enhanced during the COVID-19 pandemic and should be reinforced to prevent healthcare-associated transmission, including measures to control waterborne pathogens.  WHO does not recommend any specific different measures for travellers. In case of symptoms suggestive of respiratory illness during or after travel, travellers are encouraged to seek medical attention and share their travel history with their healthcare provider. Countries with Legionella cases reported after travel to Poland should notify their regional IHR focal points.

WHO advises against applying any travel or trade restrictions on Poland based on the current information available on this event.



Situation at a glance
Since epidemiological week 26, ending 2 July 2023, Nigeria has recorded an unusual increase in cases of diphtheria across several states. From 30 June to 31 August 2023, a total of 5898 suspected cases were reported from 59 Local Government Areas (LGAs) in 11 states. In week 34 (ending 27 August 2023), 234 suspected cases have been reported from 20 LGAs in five states, with one Lab confirmed case1 from the 22 samples collected. Eighteen of these cases were epidemiologically linked 2 and 141 were classified as clinically compatible. Diphtheria is a highly contagious vaccine-preventable disease caused mainly by the bacteria Corynebacterium diphtheriae which can be fatal in 5-10% of cases, with a higher mortality rate in young children. WHOs most recent risk assessment of the diphtheria outbreak in Nigeria has maintained the risk as high at the national level, and low at the regional and global levels. Public health measures such as vaccination response, enhanced surveillance for early case detection, case management and risk communication coordinated by the Nigeria Centre for Disease Control (NCDC), in collaboration with WHO and other partners, are being implemented in response to the outbreak.
Description of the situation

Since the last Disease Outbreak News on diphtheria in Nigeria was published on 27 April 2023, the country has reported suspected cases of diphtheria weekly to WHO. However, between 30 June and 31 August 2023, Nigeria recorded an unusual increase in the number of confirmed diphtheria cases4 (figure 1). From 30 June to 31 August 2023, a total of 5898 suspected cases were reported from 59 LGAs in 11 states across the country. The majority (99.4%) of suspected cases were reported from Kano (1816), Katsina (234), Yobe (158), Bauchi (79), Kaduna (45) and Borno (33). 

Of the cumulative 8353 suspected cases reported since the outbreak was first reported in 2022, 4717 (56.5%) cases were confirmed4 (lab confirmed1 (169; 3.6%), epidemiologically linked2 (117; 2.5%) and clinical compatibility3 (4431; 93.9%)). While 1857 (22.2%) were discarded as not compatible with diphtheria, 1048 (12.5%) cases are pending classification and 731 (8.8%) cases had unknown diagnosis. The case fatality ratio dropped slightly from 6.7% during the last update to 6.1%. Of the 4717 confirmed cases, 3466 (73.5%) were aged 1 – 14 years, of these 699 were aged 0-4 years, 1505 aged 5-9 years, 1262 (aged 10 – 14 years. More than half of the cases (2656; 56.3%) were females. Only 1074 (22.8%) of the confirmed cases were fully vaccinated against diphtheria, 299 (6.3%) were partially vaccinated. More than half of the cases (2801; 59.4%) were unvaccinated.      

Figure 1: Diphtheria cases by year/epi-week in Nigeria, 1 May 2022 – 27 August 2023



Definitive diagnosis through laboratory molecular testing identified Corynebacterium diphtheriae and Corynebacterium ulcerans isolates as the species driving this outbreak, particularly C. diphtheria as the major etiologic pathogen associated with the current outbreak. Antibiotic susceptibility tests for 62 isolates of C. diphtheriae have been carried out and the findings revealed that all isolates were resistant to penicillin, and most were resistant to trimethoprim-sulfathiazole and ciprofloxacin, while being susceptible to erythromycin. Thus, erythromycin became the drug of choice in the management of this outbreak (Figure 2).

Figure 2 Drug sensitivity results of toxigenic Corynebacterium diphtheriae isolated in Nigeria, May 2022 – July 2023



Source: Nigeria Centre for Disease Control and Prevention

Epidemiology
Diphtheria is a highly contagious vaccine-preventable disease caused mainly by Corynebacterium diphtheria but also by Corynebacterium ulcerans. It spreads between people mainly by direct contact or through the air via respiratory droplets. The disease can affect all age groups; however, unimmunized children are most at risk.

Symptoms often come on gradually, beginning with a sore throat and fever. In severe cases, the bacteria produce a poison (toxin) that causes a thick grey or white patch at the back of throat. This can block the airways, making it hard to breathe or swallow, and also creates a barking cough. The neck may swell in part due to enlarged lymph nodes.

Treatment involves administering diphtheria antitoxin (DAT) as well as antibiotics. Vaccination against diphtheria has been effective in reducing the mortality and morbidity from diphtheria dramatically. Diphtheria is fatal in 5-10% of cases, with a higher mortality rate in young children. However, in settings with poor access to diphtheria antitoxin, the CFR can be as high as 40%.

Nigeria has recorded diphtheria outbreaks in the past, notably in 2011 and 2022. In 2023, a previous outbreak of diphtheria was recorded between January and April 2023 affecting 21 of the 36 states and the FCT. Details of the outbreak have been published on Disease Outbreak News.

Public health response
Coordination: WHO Country Office Incident Management System revised, National Emergency Operation Centre (EOC) activated likewise state EOC in the diphtheria high burden Kaduna, Katsina, Borno; partners mapping ongoing.
Surveillance: Terms of reference for the pillar developed, regular follow up with the states to submit weekly situation report and line-list; WHO and other partners supported NCDC to develop contact tracking and harmonized line-list forms; database for states reporting on response activities p; dashboard for monitoring and evaluation of the response in development;
Laboratory: procurement of commodities; activation of Kano lab to perform testing and culture at state level, transportation of samples;
Vaccination: reactive vaccination Kano (phase 1 & 2), Katsina, Bauchi, Yobe, Kaduna (phase 1);
Risk Communication and Community Engagement: engagement with community leaders, community awareness, development Information Education and Communication material, monitoring rumors, airing jingles, etc.
Case management: supported development of national guideline for case management and surveillance; provided technical guidance on case management; deployed ear, nose and throat (ENT) specialists to treatment centers;
Infection Prevention Control: monitoring of treatment centers on IPC measures is being undertaken;
Operation Support and Logistics: procurement of 10 050 vials diphtheria antitoxin, 15 000 vial erythromycin ETA 28/08 and lab commodities; prepared delivery plan of Personal Protection Equipment to priority states;
Preventing and Responding to Sexual Exploitation, Abuse and Harassment: conducted PRSEAH risk assessment.
Staff health security and wellbeing: general security briefings, reporting template, FAQ on diphtheria
WHO risk assessment
Diphtheria is a vaccine-preventable disease caused mainly by exotoxin-producing Corynebacterium diphtheriae but also by Corynebacterium ulcerans.  Diphtheria is fatal in 5 - 10% of cases, with a higher mortality rate in young children. Treatment involves administering DAT as well as antibiotics. Vaccination against diphtheria reduces the mortality and morbidity of diphtheria dramatically.

Nigeria is currently facing a second wave of a diphtheria outbreak after a first wave of the outbreak was recorded between epidemiological week 52, 2022 (1 January 2023) and week 20, 2023 (22 May 2023). There is an increase in the affected population with a rise in the number of confirmed cases and related deaths reported in epidemiological weeks 31-33. There is an increased risk of transmission, with clusters and outbreaks reported in newly affected LGAs, with currently 27 LGAs reporting one clinically compatible case in the last three reporting weeks relative to 15 LGAs that had active case in the preceding three weeks.

The low national coverage (57%) of the Pentavalent vaccine (Penta 3) administered in routine immunization, and the suboptimal vaccination coverage in the pediatric population—with 43% of the target population unvaccinated—underscores the risk of further spread and the accumulation of a critical mass of susceptible population in the country with sub-optimal herd or population immunity. Vaccine coverage of 80–85% must be maintained to ensure community protection.

This emphasizes the urgent need to strengthen diphtheria vaccination coverage nationwide, especially in the most affected states, such as Kano. Additionally, particular attention is necessary for regions experiencing insecurity challenges, like the Northwest, as it hampers vaccine accessibility. Due to insecurity, especially in Northeast Nigeria, vaccination coverage remains suboptimal.

DAT supply is currently very constrained and insufficient to respond to current demands, as there is only a limited number of manufacturers and large outbreaks are being reported in different regions of the world.  The NCDC, with support from WHO and other partners have procured 10 050 DAT vials for case management in response to the outbreak.

Diphtheria outbreaks are underreported in Nigeria. According to the 2021 Nigeria Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey and National Immunization Coverage Survey, the third dose of pentavalent vaccine (Penta3) coverage was 57% in 2021.

WHO second Rapid Risk Assessment for diphtheria in Nigeria reassessed and maintained the risk as high at the national level and low at the regional and global levels.

WHO advice
The control of diphtheria is based on primary prevention of disease by ensuring high population immunity through vaccination, and secondary prevention of spread by the rapid investigation of close contacts to ensure prompt treatment of those infected.

Epidemiological surveillance ensuring early detection of diphtheria outbreaks should be in place in all countries, and all countries should have access to laboratory facilities for reliable identification of toxigenic C. diphtheriae. Adequate quantities of diphtheria antitoxin should be available nationally or regionally for the medical management of cases.

Vaccination is key to preventing cases and outbreaks, and adequate clinical management involves administering diphtheria anti-toxin to neutralize the toxin and antibiotics reducing complications and mortality.

WHO recommends early reporting and case management of suspected diphtheria cases to initiate the timely treatment of cases, and follow-up of contacts, and ensuring a supply of diphtheria antitoxin.

WHO advises implementing the following Infection Prevention & Control measures in health care settings:

1) Apply standard precautions, with focus on hand hygiene, personal protective equipment and equipment and environmental cleaning and disinfection droplet and contact precautions (at all times).

2) At screening/triage, immediately place patients with symptoms of Upper Respiratory Tract Infection in a separate area until examined, and, if a suspected case, cohorted with patients with the same diagnosis. Keep the isolation area segregated from other patient-care areas.

3) Maintain one meter between patients. Keep patient care areas well ventilated.

4) Avoid patient movement or transport out of isolation area. If movement is necessary out of isolation area, have patient use a medical mask and cover any wounds/lesions on patient’s body.

The case management should be carried out following the WHO guidelines. In addition, high-risk populations such as young children under five years of age, school children, the elderly, close contact with diphtheria cases, and healthcare workers should be vaccinated on a priority basis. A coordinated response and community engagement can support further transmission and control of the ongoing outbreak.

Prophylactic antibiotics (penicillin or erythromycin, dependent on drug sensitivity) are indicated for close contacts of confirmed cases for seven days. If the culture is positive for toxigenic Corynebacterium spp., then the contact should be treated as a case with an antibiotic course for two weeks (DAT is not needed for asymptomatic cases or cases without a pseudomembrane).

Although travelers do not have a special risk of diphtheria infection, it is recommended that national authorities remind travelers going to areas with diphtheria outbreaks to be appropriately vaccinated in accordance with the national vaccination scheme established in each country prior to travel. A booster dose is recommended if more than five years have passed since their last dose.



Situation at a glance
On 2 September 2023, the Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport of the Netherlands notified the World Health Organization (WHO) of a laboratory-confirmed human case of infection with a swine-origin influenza A(H1N1) variant (v) virus in the province of North Brabant, Netherlands. This is the first human infection caused by influenza A(H1N1)v virus reported in the Netherlands in 2023. Worldwide sporadic human cases of influenza A(H1N1)v have been reported previously, including from the Netherlands. According to the International Health Regulations (IHR,2005), a human infection caused by a novel influenza A virus subtype is an event that has the potential for high public health impact and must be notified to the WHO. This case was picked up as part of routine surveillance of respiratory illnesses. Based on the available information, there is no clear indication of the source of infection, and no direct contact with pigs was reported. As of 7 September, there were no symptomatic contacts of this case and no further detections have been reported in routine surveillance. All five close contacts were followed for 10 days- the maximum incubation period and none developed symptoms. Thus, there was no evidence of person-to-person transmission and the case is considered as a sporadic human case of influenza A(H1N1)v. The likelihood of community-level spread among humans and/or international disease spread through humans is considered as low.
Description of the situation

On 2 September 2023, WHO was notified of a confirmed human infection with a swine influenza A(H1N1)v virus, in Netherlands through the European Commission's confidential Early Warning and Response System (EWRS).

The case is an adult from the province of North Brabant with no underlying medical conditions and no history of occupational exposure to animals. On 20 August 2023, the patient developed fatigue and general malaise and the following day developed an acute respiratory infection with onset of chills, sneeze, cough, headache, and generalized weakness, followed by fever on 22 August.

On 21 August 2023, the patient reported symptoms as part of participatory surveillance[1] of acute respiratory infections and submitted a self-collected combined nose and throat swab specimen to the laboratory. On 22 August 2023, the specimen was forwarded at the Dutch National Influenza Centre location at the National Institute for Public Health and the Environment (RIVM) where it tested positive for influenza A virus and negative for A(H1N1)pdm09, both tests included on a commercial 24 pathogen multiplex nucleic acid amplification assay on 23 August.

Further routine subtyping was performed on 24 and 25 August with RT-qPCR assays. Tests for seasonal influenza viruses and H5 viruses were negative. In addition, a laboratory-developed test (LDT) and another commercial assay for generic influenza A virus detection confirmed the presence of type A influenza virus in the specimen.

Routine whole genome sequencing using nanopore technique and virus isolation were started on 28 August. On 30 August, sequencing results revealed that the virus, A/Netherlands/10534/2023, is an A(H1N1)v Eurasian avian-like clade 1C.2.2 swine influenza virus. The HA genome segment clustered closely with recent clade 1C.2.2 swine influenza viruses from 2022 and 2023 from the Netherlands.[2] It clustered less closely with previous clade 1C.2.2 A(H1N1)v (from 2019) and A(H1N2)v (from 2020) viruses from the Netherlands. Phenotypically, the virus is sensitive to neuraminidase inhibitors oseltamivir and zanamivir.

The virus isolate will be shared with the WHO Collaborating Centre in London, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the World Organization for Animal Health (WOAH) avian and swine influenza reference laboratory at the Animal and Plant Health Agency (APHA), UK. The sequences are available from the GISAID database under accession EPI_ISL_18168180.

As of 13 September, the person is recovered. Investigations reported that the individual did not work at a pig farm or other business involving pigs and does not work in health care. Therefore, there is no clear indication of the source of infection. 

Epidemiology
Influenza A(H1) viruses are enzootic in swine populations in most regions of the world. When an influenza virus that normally circulates in swine is detected in a person, it is called a “variant influenza virus”. H1N1, H1N2 and H3N2 are major subtypes of swine influenza A viruses in pigs and occasionally infect humans, usually after direct or indirect exposure to pigs or contaminated environments.

Human infections with variant viruses tend to result in mild clinical illness, although some cases have been hospitalized with more severe disease and some have been fatal.

Sporadic human infections caused by influenza A(H1N1)v and A(H1N2)v viruses have been reported in the Netherlands previously, and there has been no evidence of sustained human-to-human transmission.

This is the first human infection caused by swine influenza A(H1N1)v virus reported in 2023 in the Netherlands, and the third human infection over the past five years. Since 1986, nine variant cases have been documented in humans in the Netherlands.

Public health response
National authorities monitored the case and all close contacts. As of 7 September, none of the five close contacts have reported any symptoms. Further antigenic virus characterization is ongoing. The Zoonosis Centre and veterinarians conducted an investigation, but no possible source of infection was identified.  Therefore, no animal monitoring or testing was performed.

Few influenza viruses are currently detected in the Netherlands, and none of these characterized are variant swine influenza A viruses, apart from the current case reported.

The (online) participatory surveillance; part of www.influenzanet.info is focused on syndromic surveillance among those who may not seek care for their illness and includes a self-test study with over 17 000 participants. Participants are asked each week whether they have symptoms. From those who report a sore throat, runny nose, cough, or dyspnoea up to 200 persons are invited each week to send in a combined nose and throat swab for centralized testing at the RIVM. Over 5500 specimens have been tested since October 2022.[3]

WHO risk assessment
Most human cases result from exposure to swine influenza viruses through contact with infected swine or contaminated environments. Occasionally, the source of exposure has remained unidentified.

As these viruses continue to be detected in swine populations worldwide, further human cases following direct or indirect contact with infected swine can be expected.

Current evidence suggests that these viruses have not acquired the ability to sustain transmission among humans. There has been limited, non-sustained human-to-human transmission of variant influenza viruses, although ongoing community transmission has not been identified. In this event, there was no human-to-human transmission resulting in symptomatic disease detected and no further detections have been reported in routine surveillance.

The risk of detecting additional cases associated with this event appears to be low.

If needed, the risk assessment will be reviewed should further epidemiological or virological information become available.

WHO advice
Surveillance:

This case does not change the current WHO recommendations on public health measures and seasonal influenza surveillance.
WHO does not advise special traveller screening at points of entry or restrictions concerning the current situation of influenza viruses at the human-animal interface. 
Due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect virological, epidemiological and clinical changes associated with circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal) health and timely virus sharing for risk assessment.
Notification and investigation: 

All human infections caused by a novel influenza subtype are notifiable under the IHR and State Parties to the IHR (2005) are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a recent human infection caused by an influenza A virus with the potential to cause a pandemic. Evidence of illness is not required.
In the case of a confirmed or suspected human infection caused by a novel influenza virus with pandemic potential, including a variant virus, a thorough epidemiologic investigation of a history of exposure to animals, travel, and contact tracing should be conducted. The epidemiologic investigation should include early identification of unusual respiratory events that could signal person-to-person transmission of the novel virus. Clinical samples collected from the time and place of the case should be tested and sent to a WHO Collaboration Center for further characterization. 
Travel and trade:

WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions for the Netherlands based on the currently available information.  
Prevention measures:  

General hygiene measures, such as washing hands before and after touching animals and avoiding contact with sick animals, should be adhered.
Travelers to countries with known outbreaks of animal influenza should avoid farms, contact with animals in live animal markets, entering areas where animals may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with animal faeces.
Influenza viruses that infect pigs are different from human influenza viruses. There is no vaccine for influenza A(H1N1)v infection licensed for use in humans. However, some partners develop candidate vaccine viruses (CVV) for novel zoonotic influenza viruses with pandemic potential as part of pandemic preparedness activities.
Generally, influenza vaccines against human influenza viruses are not expected to protect people from influenza viruses that normally circulate in pigs. Although the seasonal influenza vaccine does not protect against swine viruses, WHO recommends seasonal influenza vaccination to avoid severe disease from infection with the seasonal influenza virus.




Situation at a glance
From 13 September 2022 to 12 August 2023, three laboratory-confirmed cases of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), including two deaths, were reported to WHO by the Ministry of Health of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA). Close contacts for the three cases were followed up by the Ministry of Health, and no secondary cases were identified. The notification of these cases reiterates the need for global awareness of MERS-CoV as the disease continues to pose a threat in countries where MERS-CoV is circulating in dromedary camels, including those in the Middle East.
Description of the situation
Between 13 September 2022 to 12 August 2023, the Ministry of Health of KSA reported three additional cases of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), with two associated deaths. The cases were reported from Riyadh, Asser, and Makkah Al Mukarramah regions (Figure 1). Laboratory confirmation of the cases was performed by real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).

All three cases were non-health-care workers, who presented with fever, cough, and shortness of breath, and had comorbidities. Of the three cases, two had a history of contact with dromedary camels and all three cases had a history of consumption of raw camel milk in the 14 days prior to the onset of symptoms. All three cases were male, and aged 42, 83, and 85 years respectively (Table 1).

Since the first report of MERS-CoV in KSA in 2012, human infections have been reported from 27 countries, in all six WHO regions. Of the reported 2605 cases, the majority of MERS-CoV cases (2196; 84%) have been reported from KSA, including these newly reported cases. Of the 937 deaths reported from 27 countries, a total of 856 (91%) deaths have been reported from KSA, including the newly reported deaths (Figure 2).

Figure 1. Geographical distribution of MERS-CoV cases between 13 September 2022 and 12 August by city and region, KSA (n=3).

Geographical distribution of MERS-CoV cases in KSA

Table 1. MERS-CoV cases reported by KSA between 13 September 2022 and 12 August 2023

MERS-CoV cases reported by KSA between 13 September 2022 -12 August 2023

Figure 2:  Epidemic curve of MERS-CoV cases and deaths reported in KSA between 2012 and 12 August 2023 Epidemic curve of MERS-CoV cases and deaths reported in KSA between 2012 and 12 August 2023

Epidemiology
Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) is a viral respiratory infection caused by the Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV). Approximately 36% of patients with MERS have died, though this may be an overestimate of the true mortality rate, as mild cases of MERS-CoV may be missed by existing surveillance systems, and the case fatality ratio (CFR) is calculated based only on laboratory-confirmed cases.

Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect contact with dromedary camels, which are the natural host and zoonotic source of the virus. MERS-CoV has demonstrated the ability to transmit between humans. So far, non-sustained human-to-human transmission has occurred among close contacts and in healthcare settings and outside of the healthcare setting, there has been limited human-to-human transmission.

MERS-CoV infections range from showing no symptoms (asymptomatic) or mild respiratory symptoms, to severe acute respiratory disease and death. A typical presentation of MERS disease is fever, cough, and shortness of breath. Pneumonia is a common finding, but not always present. Gastrointestinal symptoms, including diarrhoea, have also been reported. Severe illness can cause respiratory failure that requires mechanical ventilation and support in an intensive care unit. The virus appears to cause more severe disease in older people, persons with weakened immune systems, and those with comorbidities or chronic diseases such as renal disease, cancer, chronic lung disease, and diabetes.

No vaccine or specific treatment is currently available, although several MERS-CoV-specific vaccines and therapeutics are in development. Treatment is supportive and based on the patient’s clinical condition and symptoms.

Public health response
Follow-up of the close contacts was conducted for all three cases, and no secondary cases were identified.

For the two cases reporting contact with camels, the Ministry of Agriculture was informed, and an investigation of camels was conducted. There are no treatments available for MERS-CoV in animals. The identified positive camels were isolated until RT-PCR testing was negative.

WHO risk assessment
From 13 September 2012 to 12 August 2023, the total number of laboratory-confirmed MERS-CoV infection cases reported globally to WHO was 2605, with 937 (CFR 36%) associated deaths. The majority of these cases occurred in countries in the Arabian Peninsula, including 2196 cases with 856 related deaths (CFR 39%) in KSA. There has been one large outbreak outside of the Middle East, in the Republic of Korea, in May 2015, during which 186 laboratory-confirmed cases (185 in the Republic of Korea and 1 in China) and 38 deaths were reported. The index case in that outbreak had a travel history to the Middle East. The global number reflects the total number of laboratory-confirmed cases reported to WHO under IHR (2005) or directly by Ministries of Health. The total number of deaths includes the deaths that WHO is aware of to date through follow-up with affected Member States. 

WHO expects that additional cases of MERS-CoV infection will be reported from the Middle East and/or other countries where MERS-CoV is circulating in dromedaries, and that cases will continue to be exported to other countries by individuals who were exposed to the virus through contact with dromedaries or their products (for example, consumption of raw camel milk), or in a healthcare setting. WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessment based on the latest available information.  

The number of MERS cases reported to WHO has substantially declined since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic. This is likely the result of epidemiological surveillance activities for COVID-19 being prioritized and the similar clinical picture of both diseases, resulting in reduced testing and detection of MERS CoV cases. The Ministry of Health of KSA is working to improve testing capacities for better detection of MERS-CoV during the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, measures taken during the COVID-19 pandemic to reduce SARS-CoV-2 transmission (e.g., mask wearing, hand hygiene, physical distancing, improving ventilation of indoor spaces, respiratory etiquette, stay-at-home orders, reduced mobility) also likely reduced opportunities for onward human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV.

WHO advice
Based on the current situation and available information, WHO re-emphasizes the importance of strong surveillance by all Member States for acute respiratory infections, including MERS-CoV, and to carefully review and investigate any unusual patterns. 

Human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV in healthcare settings has been associated with delays in recognizing the early symptoms of MERS-CoV infection, slow triage of suspected cases, and delays in implementing infection, prevention, and control (IPC) measures. IPC measures are critical to prevent the possible spread of MERS-CoV between people in healthcare facilities. Healthcare workers should always apply standard precautions consistently with all patients, at every interaction in healthcare settings. Droplet precautions should be added to the standard precautions when providing care to patients with symptoms of acute respiratory infection; contact precautions and eye protection should be added when caring for probable or confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection; airborne precautions should be applied when performing aerosol generating procedures or in settings where aerosol generating procedures are conducted. Early identification, case management and isolation of cases, quarantine of contacts, together with appropriate infection prevention and control measures in health care setting and public health awareness can prevent human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV. 

MERS-CoV appears to cause more severe disease in people with underlying chronic medical conditions such as diabetes, renal failure, chronic lung disease, and immunocompromised persons. Therefore, people with these underlying medical conditions should avoid close contact with animals, particularly dromedaries, when visiting farms, markets, or barn areas where the virus may be circulating. General hygiene measures, such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals and avoiding contact with sick animals, should be adhered to. 

Food hygiene practices should be observed. People should avoid drinking raw camel milk, camel urine or eating meat that has not been thoroughly cooked.  The consumption of raw or undercooked animal products, including milk and meat, carries a high risk of infection from pathogens that may cause disease in humans. Animal products that are processed appropriately through cooking or pasteurization are safe for consumption. Foods that have gone through these processes should be handled with care to avoid cross contamination with uncooked/unsafe foods. Camel meat and camel milk are nutritious products that can continue to be consumed after cooking, pasteurization or other thermal treatments.

WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry regarding this event, nor does it currently recommend the application of any travel or trade restrictions. 



Situation at a glance
On 12 August 2023, the IHR National Focal Point of Chile notified WHO of a confirmed case of measles in the Metropolitan Region. The case had history of travel to Georgia, where measles is endemic, and Armenia, where measles has been eliminated, and returning to Chile via Qatar and Brazil. To date no further cases related to this importation have been detected. This is the first measles case reported in Chile since 2020. As soon as the case was notified, the local and national authorities implemented control measures, including case isolation and an epidemiological investigation to identify the exposed contacts and refer them for vaccination, and reinforced surveillance activities in the public and private health network. Measles is a highly contagious acute viral disease but can be prevented by immunization. Chile interrupted local transmission of measles in 1993. Imported cases are expected, and the susceptibility of contacts determines the spread of the disease.
Description of the situation
On 12 August 2023, IHR National Focal Point of Chile notified WHO of a confirmed case of measles in the Metropolitan Region. The patient is a 42-year-old male from Chile with a history of travel to Armenia and Georgia (between 16 July and 26 July, returning to Chile on 26 July via Qatar and Brazil), and no history of vaccination against measles. This is the first imported case of measles reported in Chile since 2020.

On 7 August 2023, the patient presented with symptoms consistent with chills, myalgias, fever and malaise, twelve days after his return to Chile. On 8 August 2023, the case developed a rash (13 days after return) and on 9 and 10 August, he sought medical attention in two different health care facilities.

On 10 August 2023, serum and urine samples were collected and tested reactive for measles by IgM and PCR at a private clinic laboratory. On 11 August 2023, the samples were sent to the Public Health Institute of Chile, the national reference laboratory, where they tested reactive for measles by IgM and PCR on the same day. The patient did not require hospitalization, and as of 17 August, his progress has been favourable.

The patient has been in contact with about a thousand people through exposures at home, work, school, in waiting rooms of health facilities and others. As of 17 August, the contacts are under follow-up, and 325 contacts have received a dose of MMR, or standard immunoglobulin (for special groups), in the context of this outbreak, other contacts have accredited vaccination (National Immunization Registry- RNI per its acronym in Spanish or vaccination certificate) of two doses against measles, and the rest are still in the referral process to complete the missing doses.

In Chile, the current vaccination scheme considers the administration of two doses of measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccine: the first dose at 12 months of life and the second dose at 36 months of age. Official measles immunization coverage in Chile with the first dose for MMR vaccine was 93.9% in 2022 and was 52.9% as of epidemiological week 26 of 2023, being below the percentage of sustained homogeneous coverage of at least 95% recommended by the WHO. According to WHO/UNICEF National Immunization Coverage (WEUNIC) estimates, Chile's vaccination coverage with two doses of measles-containing vaccine (MCV2) was less than 60% over the past two years. In addition, within this national coverage, there are subnational variations (rural and peripheral urban areas) which could include pockets of unvaccinated people in all age groups.

Epidemiology
Measles is a highly contagious acute viral disease, which affects susceptible individuals of all ages and remains one of the leading causes of death among young children globally. The mode of transmission is airborne or via droplets from the nose, mouth, or throat of infected persons.

Early symptoms of measles are fever (as high as 40°C) and malaise, cough, coryza, and conjunctivitis, followed by a rash with both raised and flat areas (maculopapular rash). The rash usually appears 14 days after exposure and spreads from the head to the trunk to the lower extremities. A patient is infectious from four days before up to four days after the appearance of the rash. There is no specific antiviral treatment for measles and most people recover within 2-3 weeks.

Measles is usually a mild or moderately severe disease. However, measles can lead to complications such as pneumonia, inflammation of brain (encephalitis), and death. Postinfectious encephalitis can occur in about one in every 1000 reported cases of measles. About two or three deaths may occur for every 1000 reported cases of measles.

Among malnourished children and immunocompromised people including people with HIV, cancer and treated with immunosuppressives, as well as pregnant women, measles can also cause serious complications, including blindness, encephalitis, severe diarrhoea, ear infection, and pneumonia.

Measles can be prevented by immunization. In countries with low vaccination coverage, epidemics typically occur every two to three years and usually last between two and three months, although their duration varies according to population size, crowding, and the population’s immunity status.

Public health response
The following public health measures were implemented by local and national health authorities:

Intensification of epidemiological surveillance with active and retrospective institutional search for cases.
Identification and follow-up of contacts for 21 days post-exposure.
Vaccination of contacts if there was no immunization record.
Use of standard immunoglobulin in the population at risk.
Notification, through IHR NFPs, of contacts who travelled to other countries.
Sending information to the IHR NFP of Georgia and Armenia for follow-up.
Additionally, during the second semester of this year, the updated strategy for students from 1st to 8th grade will be implemented in Chile [1].

WHO risk assessment
Measles remains one of the leading causes of death among young children worldwide. It is highly contagious, with 90% of non-immune people exposed to an infectious individual estimated to contract the disease.  

In 2016, the Region of the Americas was the first Region of WHO to be declared free of endemic transmission of measles viruses by the International Expert Committee (IEC) for Documenting and Verifying Measles, Rubella and the Congenital Rubella Syndrome in the Americas. Nevertheless, maintaining the Region free of measles is an ongoing challenge due to the permanent risk of importation and reintroduction of the virus. This case corresponds to a susceptible cohort of people born between 1971 and 1981 who were not immunized with two doses of MMR or did not previously present with the disease.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, there might be a risk of disruption to routine immunization activities due to both COVID-19 related burden on the health system and decreased demand for vaccination because of physical distancing requirements or community reluctance. Disruption of immunization services even for a short time can result in increased numbers of susceptible individuals and raise the likelihood of outbreak-prone vaccine-preventable diseases (VPDs) such as measles.

WHO advice
Measles anywhere is a problem everywhere because it spreads so easily. WHO recommends that countries in all regions continue to make progress towards achieving measles elimination in line with each of the endorsed Regional Goals of all WHO regions to achieve measles elimination, as well as the global strategy under IA2030, the Measles and Rubella Strategic Framework.

WHO recommends strengthening the efforts to implement the "Plan of Action for the Sustainability of Measles, Rubella, and Congenital Rubella Syndrome Elimination in the Americas 2018-2023", with its four strategic sections: 1) guarantee universal access to vaccination services; 2) strengthen the capacity of epidemiological surveillance systems for measles, rubella, and congenital rubella syndrome; 3) develop the national operational capacity to maintain the elimination status; 4) establish standard mechanisms for rapid response to imported measles, rubella, and congenital rubella syndrome cases to prevent the re-establishment of endemic transmission in the countries.

WHO recommends strengthening epidemiological surveillance in high-traffic border areas to rapidly detect and respond to highly suspected measles cases. Providing a rapid response to imported measles cases to avoid the establishment of endemic transmission through the activation of rapid response teams trained for this purpose and by implementing national rapid response protocols when there are imported cases. Once a rapid response team has been activated, continued coordination between the national, sub-national and local levels must be ensured, with permanent communication channels between all levels. During outbreaks, it is recommended to establish adequate hospital case management to avoid nosocomial transmission, with appropriate referral of patients to isolation rooms (for any level of care) and avoiding contact with other patients in waiting rooms and/or other hospital rooms.

WHO recommends vaccination of at-risk populations without proof of vaccination or immunity against measles and rubella, such as health care workers, persons working in tourism and transportation (hotels, airports, border crossings, mass transportation, and others), and international travellers who are visiting measles endemic countries. Implementing a plan to immunize migrant populations in high-traffic border areas, prioritizing those considered at-risk, including both migrants and residents, in these municipalities increases vaccination coverage to increase population immunity.

In all settings consideration should be given to providing susceptible contacts with post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP), including a dose of MCV or normal human immunoglobulin (NHIG) (if available) for those at risk and in whom the vaccine is contraindicated. In well-resourced settings, MCV should be provided to susceptible contacts within 3 days. For contacts for whom vaccination is contraindicated or is not possible within 3 days post-exposure, consideration can be given to providing NHIG up to 6 days post-exposure. Infants, pregnant women, and the immunocompromised should be prioritized.

WHO recommends maintaining sustained homogeneous coverage of at least 95% with the first and second doses of the MCV vaccine in all municipalities and strengthening integrated epidemiological surveillance of measles and rubella to achieve timely detection of all suspected cases in public, private, and social security healthcare facilities.

WHO recommends maintaining a stock of the measles-rubella (MR)and/or measles, mumps, rubella (MMR) vaccine, and syringes/supplies for control actions of imported cases. Facilitating the access to vaccination services according to the national scheme to foreigners or people from the same country who perform temporary activities in countries with ongoing outbreaks; displaced populations; indigenous populations, or other vulnerable populations.

WHO does not recommend any restriction on travel and trade to Chile based on the information available on the current outbreak. 



Situation at a glance
On 4 August 2023, the United States International Health Regulations (IHR) National Focal Point informed PAHO/WHO of a human infection with a novel influenza A(H1N2) variant virus identified in the State of Michigan. This was confirmed by Reverse Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction at the United States (US) Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) on August 2. The case was not hospitalized and is recovering from the illness. Investigations by local public health officials identified swine exposure by the patient at an agricultural fair. Additional public health response efforts including enhanced surveillance for cases is undergoing. Given the potential impact on public health, human infections with these viruses need to be monitored closely. In this event, there was no reported evidence of sustained human-to-human transmission, the illness was mild and no further influenza variant virus transmission in the community has been identified.
Description of the situation

On 4 August 2023, the United States IHR National Focal Point informed PAHO/WHO of a human infection with a novel influenza A(H1N2) variant virus identified in the State of Michigan and confirmed by the US CDC. 

According to the report, the case is under 18 years old, with no comorbidities, resident in the State of Michigan, who developed respiratory illness on 29 July 2023. The case presented with fever, cough, sore throat, muscle aches, headache, shortness of breath, diarrhea, nausea, dizziness, and lethargy. On 29 July, the case sought medical care at an emergency department, and an upper respiratory tract specimen was collected on 30 July. The specimen tested positive for influenza A virus on the same day. On 1 August, the patient received influenza antiviral treatment (Oseltamivir).

On 31 July, the specimen was tested at the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services (MDHHS), and RT-PCR results were positive for influenza A virus but lacked reactivity with diagnostic tests for contemporary human influenza viruses representing either (H1) pdm09 or (H3) subtypes. The specimen was then sent to the US CDC for further testing and received on 2 August. On the same day, RT-PCR analysis of the specimen indicated an influenza A(H1N2) variant (v) virus. The virus was isolated and subsequent analysis including genetic sequencing is underway.

The case was not hospitalized. Investigation by local public health officials identified swine exposure by the patient at an agricultural fair, that took place between 23 and 29 July, within 10 days prior to illness onset. Additional investigation did not identify respiratory illness in any of the patient’s close contacts or household contacts. No additional cases were identified related to this agriculture fair. No person-to-person transmission of influenza A(H1N2)v virus associated with this case has been identified. No additional cases of human infection with A(H1N2)v virus have been identified as of 10 August 2023.

This is the first influenza A(H1N2)v virus infection identified in the United States this year. Since 2005, there have been 512 influenza A variant virus infections (all subtypes), including 37 (human infections with influenza A (H1N2)v viruses reported in the United States.

Epidemiology
Swine influenza A(H1N2) viruses circulate in swine populations in many regions of the world. Influenza A viruses that normally circulate in swine are called “variant” influenza viruses when isolated from humans.1 Human infections are usually due to direct or indirect exposure to pigs or contaminated environments. There may be important antigenic and genetic differences between seasonal influenza viruses that circulate worldwide in the human population and influenza viruses that normally circulate in swine. Close monitoring is needed to early identify changes in the virus and/or its transmission to humans.2

Non-seasonal or zoonotic influenza viruses infecting humans may cause disease ranging from mild conjunctivitis to severe pneumonia and even death; usually, these human infections of zoonotic influenza are acquired through direct contact with infected animals or contaminated environments. Since 2005, 37 human infections with influenza A(H1N2)v virus, including this one, have been reported in the United States.

Public health response
The public health response efforts led by local officials included enhanced surveillance for cases. The county health department conducted active case finding by reaching out to fair exhibitors and their families to ascertain additional illnesses.  In addition, local providers were notified to watch for respiratory illness in persons who had attended the fair or had recent contact with swine.

WHO risk assessment
Swine influenza A viruses circulate in swine populations in many regions of the world. Depending on geographic location, the genetic characteristics of these viruses differ. When an influenza A virus that normally circulates in swine (but not people) is detected in a person, it is called a “variant influenza virus”. Most human cases are the result of exposure to swine influenza A viruses through contact with infected swine or contaminated environments. Because these viruses continue to be detected in swine populations around the world, further human cases can be expected.

According to the IHR, a human infection caused by a novel influenza A virus subtype is an event that has the potential for high public health impact. A novel influenza A virus is considered to have the potential to cause a pandemic if (1) the virus has demonstrated the capacity to infect and transmit efficiently among humans, and (2) differs from currently circulating seasonal human influenza viruses (i.e., A/H1 or A/H3), circulating widely in the human population such that the hemagglutinin (HA) gene (or protein) is not a mutated form of those; and (3) the population has little to no immunity against it.

To date, only sporadic human infections caused by influenza A(H3N2), A(H1N1) and A(H1N2) variant viruses have been reported in the United States, and there has been no evidence of sustained human-to-human transmission. Human infections with influenza variant viruses tend to result in mild clinical illness, although some cases have been hospitalized with more severe disease. Given the potential impact on public health, human infections with these viruses need to be monitored closely. In this event, there was no reported evidence of sustained human-to-human transmission, the illness was mild and no further influenza variant virus transmission in the community has been identified.

There has been some limited, non-sustained human-to-human transmission of variant influenza A viruses, although ongoing community transmission has not been identified. Current evidence suggests that these viruses have not acquired the ability of sustained transmission among humans. The risk assessment will be reviewed if needed should further epidemiological or virological information become available.

Influenza A viruses that infect pigs are different from human influenza A viruses. Currently, there is no vaccine for Influenza A(H1N2)v infection licensed for use in humans. Thus, influenza vaccines against human influenza viruses are generally not expected to protect people from influenza viruses that normally circulate in pigs.

WHO advice
This case does not change the current WHO recommendations on public health measures and surveillance of seasonal influenza.

WHO does not advise special traveller screening at points of entry or restrictions with regards to the current situation of influenza viruses at the human-animal interface. For recommendations on safe trade in animals and related products from countries affected by these influenza viruses, refer to WOAH guidance. 

The public should avoid contact with animals that are sick or dead from unknown causes, including wild animals, and should report dead wild birds and mammals or request their removal by contacting local wildlife or veterinary authorities.

WHO advises that travellers to countries with known outbreaks of animal influenza should avoid farms, contact with animals in live animal markets, entering areas where animals may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with animal excreta. Travelers should also wash their hands often with soap and water. All individuals should follow good food safety and hygiene practices. 

Due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect virologic, epidemiologic and clinical changes associated with circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal) health and timely virus sharing for risk assessment. Continued vigilance is needed within affected and neighbouring areas to detect infections in animals and humans. Collaboration between the animal and human health sectors is essential. As the extent of influenza viruses circulation in animals is not clear, epidemiologic and virologic surveillance and the follow-up of suspected human cases should continue systematically. Guidance on investigation of non-seasonal influenza and other emerging acute respiratory diseases has been published on the WHO website here.

Vigilance for the emergence of novel influenza viruses of pandemic potential should be maintained. WHO has developed practical guidance for integrated surveillance in the context of the cocirculation of SARS-CoV-2 and influenza viruses. The guidance is available here.

All human infections caused by a new subtype of influenza virus are notifiable under the International Health Regulations (IHR, 2005). State Parties to the IHR (2005) are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a recent human infection caused by an influenza A virus with the potential to cause a pandemic. Evidence of illness is not required for this report. 

It is critical that these influenza viruses from animals or from people are fully characterized in appropriate animal or human health influenza reference laboratories. Under WHO’s Pandemic Influenza Preparedness (PIP) Framework, Member States are expected to share Influenza Viruses with Pandemic Potential (IVPP) on a regular and timely basis with the Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS), a WHO-coordinated network of public health laboratories. The viruses are used by the public health laboratories to assess the risk of pandemic influenza and to develop relevant candidate vaccine viruses.



Situation at a glance
From 1 January to 7 August 2023, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare of Bangladesh reported a total of 69 483 laboratory-confirmed dengue cases and 327 related deaths, with a case fatality rate (CFR) of 0.47%. Of these, 63% of cases and 62% of the deaths were reported in the month of July 2023. Although dengue is endemic in Bangladesh, the current dengue surge is unusual in terms of seasonality and the early sharp increase in comparison to previous years, where the surge started around -late June. The CFR so far this year is relatively high compared to previous years for the full-year period. The pre-monsoon Aedes survey shows that the density of mosquitoes, and the number of potential hotspots is at the highest level in the past five years. The higher incidence of dengue is taking place in the context of an unusual episodic amount of rainfall, combined with high temperatures and high humidity, which have resulted in an increased mosquito population throughout Bangladesh.
Description of the situation

Between 1 January and 7 August 2023, a total of 69 483 dengue cases including 327 related deaths (case fatality rate = 0.47%) were reported by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW). As of 30 June 2023, a total of 7978 cases and 47 deaths were reported, however, the cases started surging rapidly from late June and in the month of July alone 63% of cases (n=43 854) and 62% of deaths (n= 204) were reported. 

The number of cases and deaths are higher compared to similar periods in the past five years (Figure 1). Dengue cases started to rise in May 2023 and have been continuing since then, and the peak is unlikely to have been reached. The reported number of dengue cases this year is the highest compared to the same periods recorded since 2000.

The cases are reported from all 64 districts in the country.  Cases in Dhaka division started to increase in epidemic week 17 (23-29 April 2023) and in all eight divisions since epidemic week 26 (25 June to 1 July 2023).  The most affected area in the Dhaka division is Dhaka city corporation, accounting for 52.8% of cases and 78.9% of deaths. Other affected divisions include Chattogram division (13.2% of cases and 9.2% of deaths), Dhaka division excluding Dhaka city (11.6% of cases and 2.8% of deaths), and Barisal division (10.5% of cases and 4.3% of deaths). The Sylhet division has the lowest number of cases (560) and no deaths reported so far.

As of 7 August 2023, the reported CFR is 0.47%, which is higher compared to previous years (table 1). On further analysis, the overall CFR is higher in females than in males (0.72% v 0.32%) with females having four times higher CFR than males among those aged 21-40 years (0.71% vs 0.18%). The older age group recorded a higher CFR compared to the younger age group (1.87% in the age group over 60 years compared to 0.74% in the age group between 41 to 60 years and 0.34% in those aged 40 years and below).

DENV2 was the predominant circulating serotype in Bangladesh until 2018, when it was replaced by DENV3 as the predominant serotype since 2019.  However, DENV2 has been identified as the primary circulating serotype in this outbreak, and this may result in more severe dengue infections and hospitalizations as a result of a second infection with a heterologous serotype. Of the 66 serotyped samples in the month of June 2023, DENV2 (51.5%) and DENV3 (43.9%) were identified as the circulating serotypes.

Figure 1. Number of dengue cases (A) and deaths (B) reported by epidemic week from 2018 to 2023 [as of 5 August (epidemiological week 31) 2023] 



Table 1: Dengue cases, deaths, and case fatality rate in Bangladesh for 2018, 2019, 2021, 2022 and 2023   

Data source: DGHS (*data for 2020 is limited due to COVID-19) 

Epidemiology
Dengue is a viral infection transmitted to humans through the bite of infected mosquitoes and is found in tropical and sub-tropical climates worldwide, mostly in urban and semi-urban areas. The primary vectors that transmit the disease are Aedes aegypti mosquitoes and, to a lesser extent, Aedes albopictus.

Dengue virus (DENV) has four serotypes (DENV-1, DENV-2, DENV-3, DENV-4). Infection with one serotype provides long-term immunity to the homologous serotype but not to the other serotypes; sequential infections with a different serotype put people at greater risk for severe dengue. Many DENV infections produce only mild flu-like illness and over 80% of cases are asymptomatic.

There is no specific treatment for dengue; however, the timely detection of cases, identifying any warning signs of severe dengue infection, and appropriate case management are key elements of care to lower case fatality rates to less than 1%.

Dengue was first recorded in the 1960s in Bangladesh (then known as East Pakistan) and was known as “Dacca fever”. Since 2010 cases of dengue appear to coincide with the rainy season from May to September and higher temperatures. Bangladesh’s climate conditions are becoming more favorable for the transmission of dengue and other vector-borne diseases including malaria and chikungunya virus due to excessive rainfall, waterlogging, flooding, rise in temperature and the unusual shifts in the country’s traditional seasons. 

Public health response
The high number of reported cases has put pressure on the health systems and the Directorate General of Health Services has taken the following actions:

Coordination

A coordination committee has been set up under the Director Disease Control & Line Director Communicable Disease Control (CDC) of the Directorate General of Health Services (DGHS) of Bangladesh to oversee the response.
A Dengue Control Room has been formed (Secretariat) for coordination and data collection at the central level. Additionally, there are Activated Control Rooms in all district and Medical College hospitals.
Health system strengthening for case management:

Six hospitals assigned for the management of COVID-19 patients in Dhaka city have been repurposed for dengue case management. Additionally, dedicated dengue wards/dengue corners have been established in Medical College hospitals. 
The fourth edition of the National Guideline for Clinical Management of Dengue Syndrome has been updated and instructions were given to all Government and Private Hospitals to follow the guideline.
There is ongoing capacity building on the clinical management of dengue for doctors and nurses across the country. Pocket guidelines for dengue have been distributed to health care staff. 
Intravenous saline and other supportive medicines, have been supplied to health facilities across the country. 
Strengthening surveillance:

The hospital-based surveillance system is actively collecting regular information from 57 hospitals in Dhaka city as well as all Upazila and district-level hospitals. Daily reports are also disseminated through the Health Emergency Operation Center (HEOC). 
 Risk communication and community engagement:

Mass awareness campaigns have been strengthened via television and other mass media methods including digital media, leaflets and posters. Community awareness is also provided by the local ward counsellors. The city corporations have informed all buildings under construction to prevent water collection and fines have been imposed on buildings where the Aedes larvae have been found. 
Advocacy and awareness meetings are ongoing in highly affected wards of Dhaka city corporation by the Aedes Transmitted Disease Control Program and IHR, Migration Health, and Emerging Reemerging Disease Control Program under CDC-DGHS. 
Laboratory:

Dengue serotyping has been conducted.
A total of 184 000 non-structural protein (NS1) diagnostic kits have been distributed to all Upazila health complexes, district hospitals and medical college hospitals.
Vector control activities:

The local government engineering department (LGED) is leading vector control activities including the elimination of mosquito breeding sites and larvicidal and adult mosquito control using different insecticides such as Temephos and Deltamethrin.
Post Monsoon Aedes Survey was carried out in all wards of Dhaka North and Dhaka South city corporation between 26 January 2023 to 4 February 2023. The results were disseminated to concerned stakeholders on 13 April 2023.
A Pre-Monsoon Aedes Survey started on 18 June 2023 and was completed on 27 June 2023. The results were disseminated to both city corporations on 4 July 2023. 
WHO risk assessment
Dengue is endemic in Bangladesh with recurrent outbreaks and is one of the major public health concerns in Bangladesh. Dengue virus has the potential to cause epidemics resulting in high morbidity and mortality. 

All four serotypes of the dengue virus have been reported in Bangladesh with the predominance of DENV 1 and DENV2 until 2016. Since 2019, when the largest dengue outbreak was reported, DENV3 has been the predominant serotype, while this year DENV2 has become the predominant serotype.  

There is no specific treatment for cases and clinical management is based on supportive therapy however, the early detection of infection and appropriate clinical management of patients can reduce the severity of disease and mortality The prevention and control of dengue depends on vector control. 

A dengue vaccine has not been approved in Bangladesh. The dengue risk at the national level is assessed as ‘High’ due to the ongoing rapidly increasing number of cases and deaths with the peak not yet reached, the high CFR compared to the previous years and the increasing geographical distribution of cases. In addition, DENV2 has been identified as the predominant circulating serotype, following four years of DENV3 predominating which may result in higher numbers of severe cases as a result of a second infection with a heterologous serotype. Furthermore, there is some pressure on the healthcare capacity due to the very high number of admissions for dengue; high vector density; and an anticipated prolonged monsoon.

Bangladesh has three international airports, three seaports and twenty-three land ports. Bangladesh shares 94% of its land border with India with frequent population movement across the land crossing, however, dengue is already endemic in India including the eastern Indian states which share land borders with Bangladesh and where Aedes mosquitoes breed and circulate. Climate change along with heavy rains in neighboring countries increase the likelihood of vector-borne disease transmission. Due to social and economic factors, many people migrate from Bangladesh to other countries thereby increasing the risk of international disease spread. Bangladesh receives a large volume of international tourists, and the possibility of travellers acquiring the disease and contributing to its further spread outside the country cannot be ruled out. 

WHO advice
The proximity of mosquito vector breeding sites to human habitation is a significant risk factor for dengue virus infection. Aedes species mosquitoes can become infected with the virus after biting DENV-infected individuals and then pass the virus onto other individuals within the vicinity. This cycle, therefore, makes the infective mosquito capable of spreading the dengue virus within households and in the neighbourhood, leading to clusters of cases. 

The prevention and control of the DENV, virus that causes dengue, depends on effective vector control. Vector control activities should focus on all areas where there is a risk of human-vector contact such as the place of residence, workplaces, schools, and hospitals. WHO promotes a strategic approach known as Integrated Vector Management (IVM) to control mosquito vectors, including Aedes species, the vector of dengue. IVM should be enhanced to remove potential breeding sites, reduce vector populations, and minimize individual exposure. This should involve vector control strategies for larvae and adults (i.e. environmental management and source reduction, especially of water storage practices, and include covering, draining and cleaning household water storage containers on a weekly basis; larvicide in non-potable water using WHO-prequalified larvicides at correct dosages, distribution of insecticide-treated nets (ITNs) for fever/dengue inpatients to contain spread of virus from health facilities, as well as strategies for protecting people and households. Indoor space spraying (fogging) is another approach for rapid containment of dengue infected mosquitoes but may be challenging to deliver in densely populated areas such as camps. 

Personal protective measures during outdoor activities include the topical application of repellents to exposed skin or treatment of clothing, and the use of long sleeves shirts and pants. Additionally, in indoors protection can include the use of household insecticide aerosol products, or mosquito coils during the day. Window and door screens, as well as air conditioning can reduce the probability of mosquitoes entering the house. Insecticide-treated nets offer good protection to people against mosquito bites while sleeping. Since Aedes mosquitoes (the primary vector for transmission) are active at dawn and dusk, personal protective measures are recommended particularly at these times of day. 

Entomological surveillance should be undertaken to assess the breeding potential of Aedes mosquitoes in containers as well as to monitor insecticide resistance to help select most effective insecticide-based interventions. Insecticide resistance test kits produced by a WHO-coordinated facility in Universiti Sains Malaysia should be procured.

There is no specific treatment for dengue infection, but early detection and access to appropriate healthcare for case management can reduce mortality. Rapid detection of severe dengue cases and timely referrals to tertiary hospitals can reduce mortality. Case surveillance should continue to be enhanced in all affected areas and across the country. Where feasible, resources should be allocated for the strengthening of a sample referral mechanism for the confirmation and sub-typing of dengue virus. 

WHO does not recommend that any general travel or trade restrictions be applied to Bangladesh based on the information available for this event. 





Situation at a glance
On 11 July 2023, WHO received an official report regarding the detection of a circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) in two acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) cases and two asymptomatic healthy children community contacts from Hagadera refugee camp, in Kenya, the second largest refugee camp in the world with over 100 000 refugees. The genetic sequencing analyses showed that all four isolates are genetically linked to the cVDPV2 circulating in Banadir, Somalia. WHO assesses the overall risk at the national level to be high due to the overcrowded living conditions in the refugee camp, high rate of malnutrition, poor water and sanitation facilities, and frequent population movements with Somalia.
Description of the situation

On 11 July 2023, WHO received an official report regarding the detection of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) in Kenya. The detection was reported from Hagadera refugee camp which is the second largest refugee camp in the world with over 100 000 refugees.

Four genetically-linked cVDPV2 were isolated in samples from two acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) cases, and two asymptomatic healthy children community contacts, from Fafi district, Garissa county. The cases and community contacts are all from Hagadera refugee camp, associated with frequent population movement with neighboring Somalia.

The first case is a 2-year-old male, vaccinated with three doses of oral poliovirus vaccine (OPV), with no travel history, who developed paralysis on 26 May, and stool samples were collected on 1 June and 2 June. The second case is a 2.7-year-old female with a travel history to Afmadhow, Lower Juba, southern Somalia, vaccinated with three doses of oral polio vaccine (OPV) who developed paralysis on 27 May, and stool samples were collected on 2 June and 3 June 2023.

A community contact, a 2-year-old male asymptomatic healthy child was identified with a stool sample collected on 25 May 2023. The child has zero-dose vaccination. A second asymptomatic healthy child community contact was also identified from Hagadera refugee camp with the same emerging strain from Somalia and case investigation is being conducted.

The genetic sequencing analyses showed that all four isolates have undergone between 65 and 73 nucleotide changes from Sabin and are genetically linked to the cVDPV2 circulating in Banadir, Somalia.

According to the WHO UNICEF estimates of national immunization coverage, oral polio vaccine third dose (OPV3) and inactivated poliovirus vaccine first dose (IPV) was 91% in Kenya in 2021. However, the coverage in Hagadera camp is 77% for both OPV3 and IPV as of May 2023.

Epidemiology
Polio is a highly infectious disease that largely affects children under five years of age, causing permanent paralysis (approximately 1 in 200 infections) or death (2-10% of those paralyzed).

The virus is transmitted from person-to-person, mainly through the fecal-oral route or, less frequently, by a common vehicle (e.g., contaminated water or food) and multiplies in the intestine, from where it can invade the nervous system and cause paralysis. The incubation period is usually 7-10 days but can range from 4-35 days. Up to 90% of those infected are either asymptomatic or experience mild symptoms and the disease usually goes unrecognized.

Vaccine-derived poliovirus is a well-documented strain of poliovirus mutated from the strain originally contained in OPV. OPV contains a live, weakened form of poliovirus that replicates in the intestine for a limited period, thereby developing immunity by building up antibodies. On rare occasions, when replicating in the gastrointestinal tract, OPV strains genetically change and may spread in communities that are not fully vaccinated against polio, especially in areas where there is poor hygiene, poor sanitation, or overcrowding. The lower the population's immunity, the longer this virus survives and the more genetic changes it undergoes.

In very rare instances, the vaccine-derived virus can genetically change into a form that can cause paralysis as does the wild poliovirus – this is what is known as a vaccine-derived poliovirus (VDPV). The detection of VDPV in at least two different sources and at least two months apart, that are genetically linked, showing evidence of transmission in the community, is classified as ‘circulating’ vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2).

Public health response
The Ministry of Health (MoH), with support from the Global Polio Eradication Initiative partners have conducted a risk assessment, along with a field investigation.
The MoH, through the Division of Disease Surveillance and Response and the Public Health Emergency Operations Centre, has activated a Technical Coordination Committee to begin preparations for the implementation of emergency outbreak response, as per internationally-agreed outbreak response guidelines, including rapid implementation of large-scale supplementary immunization activities, with the most appropriate, available type-2 containing polio vaccine.
Sub National Immunization Days (SNIDs) with nOPV2 have been planned as part of the rapid response; the first round of the vaccination campaign in August will vaccinate all children under 5 years of age targeting Garissa county, the epicenter of the outbreak, and neighboring counties with a Somali community as well as Nairobi (the capital), due to population movements. A second and third round with the expansion of targeted areas is being planned to be conducted in September and October.
Active surveillance for additional AFP cases is being further strengthened, consideration is being given to establishing new environmental sites, cross border surveillance is being intensified, and subnational immunity levels are being analyzed to identify potential un- or under-immunized populations and/or areas.
WHO risk assessment
The MoH established the Kenya Expanded Programme on Immunization (KEPI) for six priority diseases including polio in 1980.

Inactivated polio vaccine was introduced in 2015. Although the country did not have a wild poliovirus outbreak in 2014, Kenya, together with other Horn of African countries remained at risk of imported wild poliovirus from neighbouring Somalia due to the 2013 outbreak that continued until July 2014.  After this polio outbreak in 2013, the country initiated environmental surveillance for polioviruses in an effort to supplement AFP surveillance, which is the benchmark for surveillance of wild poliovirus.

WHO assesses the overall risk at the national level to be high due to the overcrowded living conditions in the refugee camp, high rate of malnutrition, poor water and sanitation facilities, mass and frequent population movements with Somalia, influx of new arrivals to the camp, late identification of the newly arrived children, high prevalence of zero dose children among the newly arriving children from middle and lower Juba Somalia, and sub-optimal surveillance performance.

WHO considers the risk of international spread and/or emergence of cVDPV2 of this strain to be high, particularly across other areas of the Horn of Africa, due to the low population immunity, the use of trivalent OPV (tOPV) in Somalia, suboptimal surveillance, and inadequate routine immunization levels in some areas, and large-scale population movements.

In all instances, the continued spread of existing outbreaks including the genetically linked cVDPV2 cases detected in Kenya which is genetically linked to the one circulating in Somalia as well as the emergence of new outbreaks of cVDPV2 indicates significant gaps in routine immunization coverage and inadequate outbreak response vaccination. The risk of further spread of such strains, or the emergence of new strains, is exacerbated by decreased immunization rates related to disruption in routine and campaign immunization during the COVID-19 pandemic.

WHO advice
It is important that all countries, particularly those with frequent travel and contacts with polio-affected countries and areas, strengthen surveillance for AFP cases and commence planned expansion of environmental surveillance to rapidly detect any new virus importation and facilitate a rapid response. Countries, territories and areas should also maintain uniformly high routine immunization coverage at the district level, including vulnerable populations such as Refugees/Returnees to minimize the consequences of any new virus introduction.

WHO’s International Travel and Health recommends that all travelers to polio-affected areas be fully vaccinated against polio. Residents (and visitors for more than 4 weeks) from infected areas should receive an additional dose of OPV or IPV within 4 weeks to 12 months of travel.

As per the advice of an Emergency Committee convened under the International Health Regulations (2005), the risk of international spread of poliovirus remains a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC). Countries affected by poliovirus transmission are subject to Temporary Recommendations. To comply with the Temporary Recommendations issued under the PHEIC, any country infected by poliovirus should declare the outbreak as a national public health emergency, ensure the vaccination of residents and long-term visitors and restrict at the point of departure travel of individuals, who have not been vaccinated or cannot prove the vaccination status.

The latest epidemiological information on cVDPVs is updated on a weekly basis.




Situation at a glance
On 4 July 2023, the Ministry of Health of the United Republic of Tanzania notified WHO of the detection of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) in the country. The virus was isolated from a case of acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) in the Rukwa region, southwestern Tanzania bordering Lake Tanganyika to the west and Zambia to the south. Gene sequencing of the isolated virus has indicated close linkage with the cVDPV2 circulating in South Kivu, Demographic Republic of the Congo (DRC).1 The public health authorities of the Ministry of Health are conducting further field investigations including strengthening the AFP surveillance for the detection of additional AFP cases and subnational level immunity gap analysis to identify potential un-or under-immunized populations and/or areas to guide public health response activities. WHO assesses the overall risk at the national level to be high due to the sub-optimal surveillance performance in some districts, sub-optimal vaccination coverage resulting in low population immunity and the ongoing population movement across neighbouring countries.
Description of the situation

On 4 July 2023, the health authorities of the United Republic of Tanzania confirmed and notified WHO of the detection of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) in the country.  The case is a child under two years old and has received three doses of bOPV vaccine, one dose of IPV vaccine for routine immunization and two doses of bOPV during supplementary immunization activities (SIA) in 2022 with no documented travel history. The child was initially reported as a case of AFP from Rukwa region of southwestern Tanzania who experienced paralysis in late May 2023.

Two stool samples were collected from the case on 30 and 31 May 2023 respectively and were confirmed to be cVDPV2 on 30 June 2023. Gene sequencing results showed that the isolated virus has undergone 15 nucleotide changes and is closely related to the strain circulating in South Kivu, Demographic Republic of the Congo in 2023.1

Since 2022, Tanzania has been actively participating in a multi-country outbreak response across south-east Africa, in response to detection of different strains of poliovirus in the sub-region, including boosting immunity levels through mass vaccination campaigns and strengthening subnational surveillance capacity.

According to the WHO-UNICEF estimates of national immunization coverage, the oral polio vaccine third dose (OPV3) and the inactivated polio vaccine first dose (IPV1) was 88% in 2022 in Tanzania.

Epidemiology
Polio is a highly infectious disease that largely affects children under five years of age, causing permanent paralysis (approximately 1 in 200 infections) or death (2-10% of those paralyzed).

The virus is transmitted from person-to-person, mainly through the fecal-oral route or, less frequently, by a common vehicle (e.g., contaminated water or food) and multiplies in the intestine, from where it can invade the nervous system and cause paralysis. The incubation period is usually 7-10 days but can range from 4-35 days. Up to 90% of those infected are either asymptomatic or experience mild symptoms and the disease usually goes unrecognized.

Vaccine-derived poliovirus is a well-documented strain of poliovirus mutated from the strain originally contained in OPV. OPV contains a live, weakened form of poliovirus that replicates in the intestine for a limited period, thereby developing immunity by building up antibodies. On rare occasions, when replicating in the gastrointestinal tract, OPV strains genetically change and may spread in communities that are not fully vaccinated against polio, especially in areas where there is poor hygiene, poor sanitation, or overcrowding. The lower the population's immunity, the longer this virus survives and the more genetic changes it undergoes.

In very rare instances, the vaccine-derived virus can genetically change into a form that can cause paralysis as does the wild poliovirus – this is what is known as a vaccine-derived poliovirus (VDPV). The detection of VDPV in at least two different sources and at least two months apart, that are genetically linked, showing evidence of transmission in the community, is classified as ‘circulating’ vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2).

The last recorded case of indigenous wild poliovirus (WPV) in Tanzania was in 1996, and the cVPDV2 case in 2023 is the first case detected in the country.

Public health response
A risk assessment is being conducted, led by the Ministry of Health and supported by Global Polio Eradication Initiative partners, along with a field investigation and planning of appropriate response.
The capacity of the country’s AFP surveillance has been strengthened to detect additional AFP cases.
Subnational immunity levels are being analysed to identify potential un-or under-immunized populations and/or areas.
WHO risk assessment
WHO assesses the overall risk at the national level to be high due to the sub-optimal AFP surveillance performance in some districts, the sub-optimal vaccination coverage resulting in low population immunity and more susceptible children, and the ongoing population movement across neighbouring countries.

WHO considers this event to be of high risk of international spread and/or emergence of cVDPV2 of this strain across the region, particularly across other areas of central and south-east Africa, due to the low population immunity and inadequate routine immunization levels in some areas, and large-scale population movements. In all instances, the continued spread of existing outbreaks as well as the emergence of new outbreaks of cVDPV2 point to gaps in routine immunization coverage and inadequate outbreak response vaccination.

While new WHO and UNICEF data show promising signs of immunization services rebounding in some countries, coverage still falls short of pre-pandemic levels putting children at risk from disease outbreaks, particularly in low-income countries.  In response to these latest published data, the members of the Immunization Agenda 2030 Partnership Council called for further strengthened efforts (Immunization Agenda 2030) for immunization recovery.

WHO advice
It is important that all countries, in particular those with frequent travel and contacts with polio-affected countries and areas, strengthen surveillance for AFP cases and commence planned expansion of environmental surveillance to rapidly detect any new virus importation and to facilitate a rapid response. Countries, territories and areas should also maintain uniformly high routine immunization coverage at the district level to minimize the consequences of any new virus introduction.

WHO’s International Travel and Health recommends that all travelers to polio-affected areas be fully vaccinated against polio. Residents (and visitors for more than 4 weeks) from infected areas should receive an additional dose of OPV or IPV within 4 weeks to 12 months of travel.

As per the advice of an Emergency Committee convened under the International Health Regulations (2005), the risk of international spread of poliovirus remains a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC). Countries affected by poliovirus transmission are subject to Temporary Recommendations. To comply with the Temporary Recommendations issued under the PHEIC, any country infected by poliovirus should declare the outbreak as a national public health emergency, ensure the vaccination of residents and long-term visitors and restrict at the point of departure travel of individuals, who have not been vaccinated or cannot prove the vaccination status.

The latest epidemiological information on cVDPVs is updated on a weekly basis.





Situation at a glance
On 26 June 2023, the National Center for Epidemiology, Prevention, and Disease Control (CDC) of Peru issued an epidemiological alert due to an unusual increase in Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS) cases in different regions of the country. According to historical data (excluding the 2019 outbreak), the average monthly number of GBS cases registered is less than 20 suspected cases per month nationwide. However, between 10 June – 15 July 2023, 130 suspected cases1 of GBS have been reported. Out of these cases, 44 have been confirmed. 2,3 This increase in the number of observed cases is higher than expected. The Presidency of the Republic of Peru in early July 2023, declared a national health emergency due to the unusual increase and enhanced the implementation of public health responses. To date, the potential cause of the unexpected GBS incidence remains under investigation. WHO advises Member States to maintain the ongoing monitoring of the incidence and trends of neurological disorders, especially GBS, to identify variations against their expected baseline values and implement protocols for improved patient management. By closely observing and tracking these conditions, countries can effectively respond to any changes and ensure appropriate measures are in place to address potential public health concerns.
Description of the situation

Between epidemiological weeks 1 and 28 (until 15 July 2023), a total of 231 suspected GBS cases were reported in Peru as defined by the National Center for Epidemiology, Prevention, and Disease Control (CDC) Technical Health Standard for Epidemiological Surveillance and Laboratory Diagnosis for GBS1 in 20 of the country’s 24 departments. Fifty-six percent of the cases (130 cases) were reported between epidemiological weeks 23 (10 June 2023) and 28 (15 July 2023).  Since the start of the year, the highest number of GBS cases were recorded in seven of the country’s 24 departments: Lima and Callao (75 cases), La Libertad (39), Piura (21), Lambayeque (20), Cajamarca (17), Junín (12), and Cusco (10). As of 15 July 2023, 100 cases have been confirmed to be compatible with GBS 2,3, including four deaths (Case Fatality Rate (CFR) 1.7%).

The age group most affected were adults ≥ 30 years (158 cases) while children under 17 years of age accounted for 19% of the cases (44 cases). More than half of the reported cases (133; 57.6%) were males.

The preliminary clinical manifestations of the 130 cases reported between epidemiological weeks 23 (10 July 2023) and 28 (15 July 2023) include gastrointestinal infection, respiratory infection and fever. In addition, 72.3% of these cases (94 cases) presented with upward progression of paralysis as neurological manifestation, with other cases presenting with some type of sequelae. 

Samples were collected from the cases according to the technical health standard for epidemiological surveillance and laboratory diagnosis of GBS in Peru. Between epidemiological weeks 23 and 28, 22 samples were collected of which 14 (63%) were positive for Campylobacter jejuni (one of the most common risk factors for GBS) in samples from the departments of La Libertad (5 cases), Lima (4), Piura (3), Cusco (1) and Lambayeque (1), with the sample from Lambayeque further characterised as genotype Campylobacter jejuni sequence type (ST)2993.

Figure 1. Guillain Barré Syndrome case trends in Peru 2021, 2022 and 2023 (Epidemiological week 28)



Source: National Center for Epidemiology, Prevention and Disease Control (CDC) Peru-Peru. The situation of Guillain Barré syndrome -Peru, 2023 (Epidemiological Week 28)

Epidemiology
Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS) is a rare neurological disorder of variable clinical severity, including fatal outcomes. It is the most common form of acute flaccid paralysis worldwide and is characterized by motor weakness, areflexia (absence of muscle reflexes), sensory abnormalities, and elevated protein levels in cerebrospinal fluid (cytoalbuminologic dissociation). Most often, an upper respiratory or gastrointestinal illness typically precedes GBS.

There is currently no known cure for GBS. However, people with GBS need supportive treatment, sometimes in intensive care and follow-up. Most treatments available can help manage the symptoms, support the recovery process, and potentially shorten the duration of the illness. Although most cases, even the most serious ones, fully recover, they can produce almost total paralysis. Campylobacter jejuni infection is the most frequently identified precipitant and usually is associated with the acute motor axonal neuropathy form of GBS. While this syndrome is more common in adults and in males, people of all ages can be affected.

In 2019, Peru reported an unprecedented outbreak of GBS that affected several regions of the country, with almost 700 reported cases (incidence: 1.2/100,000 inhabitants). From the clinical-epidemiological characteristics and the study of the identified agents, it was concluded that the outbreak was associated with the presence of the Campylobacter jejuni sequence type (ST) 2993 genotype. In addition, during the year 2020, a total of 448 cases were reported nationally with a weekly average of 11 cases; in 2021, a total of 210 cases were reported with a weekly average of four cases. Similarly, in 2022, there were 225 cases reported with a consistent weekly average of four cases.

Public health response
The National Center for Epidemiology, Prevention, and Disease Control (CDC) of Peru of the Ministry of Health issued an epidemiological alert on 26 June 2023 and has maintained monitoring of the situation through a GBS Situation Room.

On 8 July 2023, the Presidency of the Republic of Peru declared a national health emergency due to the unusual increase in cases of GBS. The decree provides:

The implementation of an action plan that includes financing for the provision of strategic resources in health, including the acquisition of 7000 human immunoglobulins as part of the treatment of patients with Guillain Barré syndrome, promoting recovery, and preventing complications associated with the disorder.
Intensification of surveillance, prevention, and response actions to possible cases.
Communication of risk to health professionals and issuance of key messages to the population to adopt preventive measures.
Advice, information, and guidance on Guillain Barré syndrome to health professionals and the general population. 
WHO is supporting the health authorities of Peru in the management of this event.

WHO risk assessment
Guillain-Barré syndrome is a rare condition, and while it is more common in adults and males, people of all ages can be affected. The cause of it is not fully understood, but most cases follow an infection with a virus or bacteria. This leads the immune system to attack the body itself. Infection with the bacteria Campylobacter jejuni, which causes gastroenteritis, is one of the most common risk factors for GBS. People can also develop GBS after having the flu or other viral infections, including cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, and the Zika virus. In rare instances, vaccinations may increase the risk of people getting GBS, but the likelihood of this occurring is extremely low. Studies show that people are much more likely to get GBS from infections such as the flu than from the vaccine given to prevent the infection, in this case, the flu vaccine. Occasionally, surgery can trigger GBS.

To date, the potential cause of the reported increase in GBS incidence in Peru remains under investigation as Campylobacter jejuni infection was confirmed by the laboratory in 63% of GBS cases from 22 samples tested since epidemiological week 23. In 2019, Peru reported an unprecedented outbreak of Guillain-Barré Syndrome that affected several regions of the country, which was concluded to be associated with the presence of the Campylobacter jejuni ST2993 genotype.

Further investigations are needed to identify the possible causes associated with the increase. So far, no association has been found with the current dengue outbreak, and Zika virus transmission is currently low in the country. Additionally, there have been no reports of a similar surge in cases in other countries of the Americas.

WHO advice
WHO advice to Member States is to continue to monitor the incidence and trends of neurological disorders, especially GBS, to identify variations against their expected baseline values, develop and implement sufficient patient management protocols to manage the additional burden on healthcare facilities generated by a sudden increase in patients with GBS, raise awareness among healthcare workers and establish and/or strengthen links between public health services and clinicians in the public and private sectors.

WHO has not issued any recommendations that would impose travel and/or trade restrictions specifically for Peru in response to this event.





Situation at a glance
On 10 July 2023, the United Arab Emirates (UAE), notified WHO of a case of Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV) in a 28-year-old male from Al Ain city in Abu Dhabi. The case had no history of direct or indirect contact with dromedaries, goats, or sheep. The patient was admitted to the hospital on 8 June. A nasopharyngeal swab was collected on 21 June and tested positive for MERS-CoV by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) on 23 June 2023. All 108 identified contacts were monitored for 14 days from the last date of exposure to the MERS-CoV patient. No secondary cases have been detected to date. Since July 2013, when the UAE reported the first case of MERS-CoV, 94 confirmed cases (including this new case) and 12 deaths have been reported. Globally, the total number of confirmed MERS-CoV cases reported to WHO since 2012 is 2605, including 936 associated deaths. WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessments based on the latest available information. WHO expects that additional cases of MERS-CoV infection will be reported from the Middle East and/or other countries where MERS-CoV is circulating in dromedaries. WHO re-emphasizes the importance of strong surveillance by all Member States for acute respiratory infections, including MERS-CoV, and to carefully review any unusual patterns.
Description of the situation

On 10 July 2023, the International Health Regulations National Focal Point (IHR NFP) of the United Arab Emirates (UAE) notified WHO of a confirmed case of MERS-CoV in Abu Dhabi. The patient is a 28-year-old male, non- Emirati national living in Al Ain city, a non-healthcare worker.  The case visited a private medical center multiple times between 3 and 7 June 2023, complaining of vomiting, right flank pain, and dysuria (pain when passing urine). On 8 June, the case presented to a government hospital with vomiting, and gastrointestinal symptoms including diarrhea, and was given an initial diagnosis of acute pancreatitis, acute kidney injury, and sepsis.

On 13 June, he was in critical condition and referred to an intensive care unit (ICU) at a specialized government tertiary hospital where he was put on mechanical ventilation. He deteriorated and a nasopharyngeal swab was collected on 21 June and tested positive for MERS-CoV by PCR on 23 June 2023.

The case has no known co-morbidities, no history of contact with MERS-CoV human cases, and no recent travel outside the UAE. The patient has no known history of direct contact with animals including dromedary camels, nor consumption of their raw products.

All 108 contacts that were identified have been monitored for 14 days from the last date of exposure to the MERS-CoV patient, no secondary case was identified. The case has no family members or household contacts identified in the UAE.

Prior to this notification, the last MERS-CoV infection reported from the UAE was in November 2021. The first laboratory-confirmed case of MERS-CoV in UAE was in July 2013. Since then, the UAE has reported 94 cases of MERS-CoV (including this current case) and 12 associated deaths (Case Fatality Ratio (CFR): 13%).

Epidemiology
Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) is a viral respiratory infection that is caused by a coronavirus called Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV). Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect contact with dromedary camels who are the natural host and zoonotic source of the MERS-CoV infection.

MERS-CoV infections range from asymptomatic or mild respiratory symptoms to severe acute respiratory disease and death. A typical presentation of a person with MERS-CoV disease is fever, cough and shortness of breath. Pneumonia is a common finding, but not always present. Gastrointestinal symptoms, including diarrhoea, have also been reported. The virus appears to cause more severe disease in older people, persons with weakened immune systems and those with chronic diseases such as renal disease, cancer, chronic lung disease, and diabetes. Severe illness can cause respiratory failure that requires mechanical ventilation and support in an intensive care unit resulting in high mortality.

No vaccine or specific treatment is currently available, although several MERS-CoV-specific vaccines and treatments are in development. Treatment is supportive and based on the patient’s clinical condition.

Public health response
A total of 108 contacts from health care facilities were identified and screened for MERS-CoV (56 from the first government hospital and 52 from the second government hospital) all of which were health care workers (HCWs), screening for exposed HCWs was repeated by respiratory samples, all results were negative.
All 108 identified contacts were monitored for 14 days from the last date of exposure to the MERS-CoV patient, and no secondary cases have been detected to date.
Abu Dhabi Public Health Centre (ADPHC) has updated the case definition for MERS-CoV, strengthened surveillance activities to identify possible cases, conducted several workshops and issued circulars for MERS-CoV.
WHO risk assessment
Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) is a viral respiratory infection of humans and dromedary camels which is caused by a coronavirus called the Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV). Infection with MERS-CoV can cause severe disease in humans resulting in high mortality. Approximately 35% of patients with MERS-CoV have died, but this may be an overestimate of the true mortality rate, as mild cases of MERS-CoV may be missed by existing surveillance systems. Until more is known about the disease, the case fatality rates are counted only amongst the laboratory-confirmed cases reported to WHO.

Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect contact with dromedaries, a host and zoonotic source of MERS-CoV infection. MERS-CoV has demonstrated the ability to be transmitted between humans. So far, the observed non-sustained human-to-human transmission has occurred among close contacts and in healthcare settings. Outside of the healthcare setting, there has been limited human-to-human transmission.

Cases of MERS-CoV infection are rare in the UAE. Since July 2013, a total of 94 MERS-CoV cases, including this current case, resulting in 12 deaths (CFR 13%) have been reported to WHO from the UAE.

Globally, the total number of laboratory-confirmed MERS-CoV cases reported to WHO since 2012 is 2605, including 936 associated deaths as of July 2023. The majority of the reported cases have occurred in countries in the Arabian Peninsula. Outside of this region, there has been one large outbreak in the Republic of Korea, in May 2015, during which 186 laboratory-confirmed cases (185 in the Republic of Korea and one in China) and 38 deaths were reported. The global number reflects the total number of laboratory-confirmed cases and deaths reported to WHO under IHR (2005) to date.

The notification of this case does not change the overall risk assessment. WHO expects that additional cases of MERS-CoV infection will be reported from the Middle East and/or other countries where MERS-CoV is circulating in dromedaries, and that cases will continue to be exported to other countries by individuals who were exposed to the virus through contact with dromedaries or their products (for example, consumption of camel’s raw milk), or in a healthcare setting.

WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessments based on the latest available information. 

WHO advice
Based on the current situation and available information, WHO re-emphasizes the importance of strong surveillance by all Member States for acute respiratory infections, including MERS-CoV, and to carefully review any unusual patterns.

Given that this latest case presents with severe disease but has no comorbidities and no exposure history to camels, camel raw products or MERS-CoV human case, it will be important to sequence the virus and conduct genomic analysis to screen for any unusual patterns. The process for genomic analysis has begun. This will identify any genetic evolution of the virus and support WHO’s global risk assessment efforts. 

As a general precaution, anyone visiting farms, markets, barns or other places where dromedaries are present should practice general hygiene measures, including regular hand washing after touching animals, avoiding touching eyes, nose or mouth with hands, and avoiding contact with sick animals. People may also consider wearing protective gowns and gloves while professionally handling animals.

The consumption of raw or undercooked animal products, including milk, meat, blood and urine, carries a high risk of infection from a variety of organisms that might cause disease in humans. Animal products processed appropriately through proper cooking or pasteurization are safe for consumption but should also be handled carefully to avoid cross-contamination with uncooked foods.

Human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV in healthcare settings has been associated with delays in recognizing the early symptoms of MERS-CoV infection, slow triage of suspected cases and delays in implementing infection, prevention and control (IPC) measures. IPC measures are therefore critical to prevent the possible spread of MERS-CoV between people in health-care facilities. Health -care facilities should ensure environmental and engineering controls are in place including adequate ventilation, spatial separation of at least one meter between patients and others, including health and care workers and adequate environmental cleaning. Health care workers should consistently apply standard precautions to all patients at every interaction in healthcare settings. Droplet precautions, including eye protection, should be applied in addition to standard precautions when providing care to patients with symptoms of acute respiratory infection; contact precautions should be added when caring for probable or confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection; airborne precautions should be applied when performing aerosol-generating procedures or in settings where aerosol-generating procedures are conducted. Early identification, case management and isolation of cases, quarantine of contacts, appropriate infection prevention and control measures in health care settings, and public health awareness can prevent human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV.

MERS-CoV appears to cause more severe disease in people with underlying chronic medical conditions such as diabetes, renal failure, chronic lung disease, and in immunocompromised persons. Therefore, people with these underlying medical conditions should avoid close contact with animals, particularly dromedaries, when visiting farms, markets, or barn areas where the virus is known to be potentially circulating.

WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event, nor does it currently recommend the application of any travel or trade restrictions.




Situation at a glance
Since the beginning of 2023, dengue outbreaks of significant magnitude have been recorded in the WHO Region of the Americas, with close to three million suspected and confirmed cases of dengue reported so far this year, surpassing the 2.8 million cases of dengue registered for the entire year of 2022. Of the total number of dengue cases reported until 1 July 2023 (2 997 097 cases), 45% were laboratory confirmed, and 0.13% were classified as severe dengue. The highest number of dengue cases to date in 2023 are in Brazil, Peru, and Bolivia. Additionally, 1302 deaths were reported in the Region with a Case Fatality Rate (CFR) of 0.04%, in the same period. As part of the implementation of the Integrated Management Strategy for the Prevention and Control of Arboviral Diseases (IMS-Arbovirus), WHO is actively working with the Member States to strengthen healthcare and surveillance capacity. WHO has assessed the risk of dengue as high at the regional level due to the wide spread distribution of the Aedes spp. mosquitoes (especially Aedes aegypti), the continued risk of severe disease and death, and the expansion out of historical areas of transmission, where all the population, including risk groups and healthcare workers, may not be aware of warning signs. WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions for countries in the Americas experiencing the current dengue epidemics based on the currently available information.
Description of the situation

Dengue is the arbovirus that causes the highest number of cases in the Region of the Americas, with epidemics occurring cyclically every 3 to 5 years. During the first half of 2023, dengue outbreaks of significant magnitude were recorded in South America.  Between epidemiological week (EW) 1 and EW 26 of 2023 (week ending on 01 July), a total of 2 997 097 cases of dengue were reported in the Region of the Americas, including 1302 deaths with a CFR of 0.04%, with a cumulative incidence rate of 305 cases per 100 000 population. Of the total number of dengue cases until EW 26 of 2023, 1 348 234 (45%) were laboratory confirmed, and 3907 (0.13%) were classified as severe dengue.1 The highest number of dengue cases was observed in Brazil, with 2 376 522 cases, followed by Peru with 188 326 cases, and Bolivia with 133 779 cases.

The highest cumulative incidence rates were observed in the following subregions: the Southern Cone2 with 862 cases per 100 000 inhabitants, the Andean Subregion3 with 268 cases per 100 000 inhabitants, and the Central American Isthmus and Mexico4 with 59 cases per 100 000 inhabitants.

The highest number of severe dengue cases was observed in the following countries: Brazil with 1249 cases, Peru with 701 cases, Colombia with 683 cases, Bolivia with 591 cases and Mexico with 141 cases.

All four dengue virus serotypes (DENV1, DENV2, DENV3, and DENV4) are present in the Region of the Americas. In 2023, up to EW 26 (ending on 1 July), simultaneous circulation of all four serotypes has been detected in Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, and Venezuela; while in Argentina, Panama, Peru, and Puerto Rico, DENV1, DENV2 and DENV3 serotypes circulate, and in Nicaragua the serotypes DENV1, DENV3 and DENV4.

In 2022, 2 811 433 dengue cases were reported in the Region of the Americas, the third highest year on record, only surpassed by 2016 and 2019. In 2019, the highest number of historical dengue cases was registered, with more than 3.1 million cases for the Region of the Americas, including 28 203 severe cases and 1823 deaths.

Between 12 June to 1 July 2023, some countries in the Southern Cone and the Andean subregion have been showing a decrease in the number of cases due to multiple factors, including, the implementation of control measures, and the change in temperature and climate, mainly in the Southern Cone. There is also a delay in the notification of data from some countries in Central America and the Caribbean. These have resulted in a decline in cases and the downward trend observed in the epidemiological curve below.

Figure 1. Number of dengue cases in 2022, 2023 (up to EW 26) and average of the last 5 years in the Region of the Americas



Source: Data entered into the Health Information Platform for the Americas (PLISA, PAHO/WHO) by the Ministries and Institutes of Health of the countries and territories of the Region. Available from: https://opendata.paho.org/en.  Accessed July 11, 2023. 

Figure 2. Suspected cases (A) and cumulative incidence per 100 0000 population(B) of dengue in the most affected countries** in the Region of the Americas, as of 01 July 2023



** Countries which reported 99% of cases in the Region of the Americas

Source: Data entered into the Health Information Platform for the Americas (PLISA, PAHO/WHO) by the Ministries and Institutes of Health of the countries and territories of the Region. Accessed July 11, 2023

Figure 3. Deaths(A) and CFR(B) from dengue in the Region of the Americas, as of EW 26, 2023



Source: Data entered into the Health Information Platform for the Americas (PLISA, PAHO/WHO) by the Ministries and Institutes of Health of the countries and territories of the Region.

Overview by selected countries

Although dengue is endemic in most countries of South America, Central America, and the Caribbean, during the current season, an increase in dengue cases has been observed at levels above the average number of cases recorded in the last five years and beyond historical areas of transmission. Below is a summary of the epidemiological situation of dengue in most affected countries5 in the Region of the Americas reported to PAHO/WHO.

Argentina6

According to the Argentina IHR National Focal Point, up to EW 26 of 2023 (week ending on 01 July), 126 431 cases of dengue were reported, of which 118 089 were autochthonous, 1398 were imported, and 6944 are under investigation. Fifty-three percent of the cases were laboratory-confirmed and 304 (0.24%) were classified as severe dengue. A total of 65 deaths were reported during this period with a CFR of 0.05%. Compared to the last epidemiological outbreak of dengue recorded in the country in the 2019/2020 season (59 264 cases year 2020), there is a 47% increase in the number of cases in the 2022/2023 period (126 431 cases year 2023).

Brazil

In 2023 up to EW 26, of the 2 376 522 reported dengue cases, 1 051 773 (44.2%) were laboratory confirmed, and 1 249 (0.05%) were classified as severe dengue. The cases registered up to EW 26 of 2023 show an increase of 13% compared to the same period of 2022 and 73% compared to the average of the last five years. In the same period, a total of 769 deaths were reported with CFR of 0.03%.

Bolivia

In 2023 up to EW 25, of the 133 779 reported dengue cases, 22 761 (17%) were laboratory confirmed, and 591 (0.44%) were classified as severe dengue. The cases registered to EW 25 of 2023 are 16 times higher than those reported in the same period of 2022 and five times higher compared to the average of the last five years. In the same period, 77 deaths were reported with CFR of 0.06%.

Colombia

In 2023 up to EW 25, of the 50 818 reported dengue cases, 25 958 (51%) were laboratory confirmed, and 683 (1.34%) were classified as severe dengue. The cases registered in EW 25 of 2023 are 66% higher than those reported in the same period of 2022 and 47% higher compared to the average of the last five years. In the same period, 29 deaths were reported with CFR of 0.06%.

Costa Rica

In 2023, up to EW 25, of the 2712 reported dengue cases, 254 (9.3%) were laboratory confirmed, and there were no cases of severe dengue. The cases registered up to EW 25 of 2023 are 16% higher compared to the same period of 2022, and 19% higher compared to the average of the last five years. In the same period, no deaths were reported.

Guatemala

In 2023, up to EW 24, of the 4529 reported dengue cases, 699 (15%) were laboratory confirmed, and six (0.13%) were classified as severe dengue. The cases registered up to EW 24 of 2023 are 80% higher compared to the same period of 2022, and 45% higher compared to the average of the last five years. In the same period, five deaths were reported with CFR of 0.11%. 

Mexico7

According to the Mexico IHR National Focal Point, up to EW 26 of 2023, of the 31 549 reported dengue cases, 4400 (14%) were laboratory confirmed, and 141 (2%) were classified as severe dengue. The cases registered up to EW 26 of 2023 are 2.5 times higher compared to the same period in 2022 and 58% higher compared to the average of the last five years. In the same period, five deaths were reported with CFR of 0.02%.

Nicaragua

In 2023, up to EW 25, of the 56 780 reported suspected dengue cases, 1016 (1.8%) were laboratory confirmed, and 10 (0.02%) were classified as severe dengue. The cases registered up to EW 25 of 2023 are 2.7 times higher compared to the same period in 2022 and 2.1 times higher compared to the average of the last five years. In the same period, one death was reported with CFR of 0.002%.

Panama8

In 2023, up to EW 24, of the 3176 reported dengue cases, 2161 (68%) were laboratory confirmed, and seven (0.22%) were classified as severe dengue. The cases registered up to EW 24 of 2023 are 54% higher compared to the same period of 2022, and 63% higher compared to the average of the last five years. In the same period, no deaths were reported.

Peru9

In 2023 up to EW 26, of the 188 326 reported dengue cases, 105 215 (55.9%) were laboratory confirmed, and 701 (0.37%) were classified as severe dengue. The cases registered up to EW 26 of 2023 are 3.1 times higher than those reported in the same period of 2022. In the same period, a total of 325 deaths were reported between suspected and confirmed cases, with CFR of 0.17%.

Epidemiology
Dengue is a viral infection that spreads from mosquitoes to people. It is more common in tropical and subtropical climates. Most people who get dengue won’t have symptoms. But for those that do, the most common symptoms are high fever, headache, body aches, nausea and rash. Most people will get better in 1–2 weeks, however, some people develop severe dengue which includes shock or respiratory distress due to plasma leakage, severe bleeding, organ impairment, and death.

In severe cases, dengue can be fatal. The risk of dengue can be avoided by avoiding mosquito bites especially during the day. There is currently no specific treatment for dengue, therefore, case management focuses on managing pain symptoms with Acetaminophen. Some of the severe cases are secondary infections (people getting infected for a second time with another serotype).

The incidence of dengue has grown dramatically around the world in recent decades, with cases reported to WHO increasing from 505 430 cases in 2000 to 5.2 million in 2019 globally. A vast majority of cases are asymptomatic or mild and self-managed, and hence the actual numbers of dengue cases are under-reported. Many cases are also misdiagnosed as other febrile illnesses.

The disease is now endemic in more than 100 countries in the WHO Regions of Africa, the Americas, the Eastern Mediterranean, South-East Asia and the Western Pacific. The Americas, South-East Asia and Western Pacific regions are the most seriously affected, with Asia representing around 70% of the global disease burden.

The largest number of dengue cases ever reported globally was in 2019. All regions were affected, and dengue transmission was recorded in Afghanistan for the first time. The American Region reported 3.1 million cases, with more than 25 000 classified as severe. A high number of cases were reported in Bangladesh (101 000), Malaysia (131 000) Philippines (420 000), and Vietnam (320 000).

Public health response
Ministry of Health (MoH) response:

Regular meetings with national and subnational health authorities. Some countries have implemented Emergency Center Operations (EOC) for a suitable outbreak response.
Strengthened surveillance activities for early detection of cases.
Strengthened vector-control activities in affected areas.
Strengthening of the laboratory network.
Trained healthcare professionals in the detection of warning signals of severe dengue.
Facilitated awareness raising among health workers (by sharing factsheets and surveillance tools) and to the local population using risk communication messages. 
Some countries have national networks of clinical experts in arboviral diseases under the direction of the Ministries of Health in each country, which are responsible for conducting clinical training at the local level.
WHO response:

As part of the implementation of the Integrated Management Strategy for the Prevention and Control of Arboviral Diseases (IMS-Arbovirus), WHO is actively working with the Member States so that they can strengthen healthcare and surveillance capacity.
WHO has been supporting Member States in preparedness and response to possible outbreaks, including the organization of health services.
WHO is supporting the implementation of effective integrated vector surveillance and control by Member States through publishing guidelines and the provision of epidemiological surveillance materials and technical assistance to national authorities.   
WHO is supporting the increase of laboratory-capacity to enable timely and accurate diagnosis and case detection throughout the region.
WHO is supporting health care workers capacity building through case management recommendations and clinical care training.
WHO experts are being deployed to countries that are experiencing high-magnitude outbreaks. 
In 2020, WHO began a collaboration with the Andean Health Organization-Hipólito Unanue Agreement (ORAS-CONHU) to strengthen national technical capacities for the prevention and control of arboviral diseases in Bolivia, Colombia, Chile, Ecuador, Peru, and Venezuela. This collaboration falls under the framework of the Integrated Management Strategy for the Prevention and Control of Arboviral Diseases, approved by WHO.
Virtual cooperation spaces (VCS) have been created as an effort of collaborative surveillance between WHO and the Member States that allow the automated generation of different epidemiological analyses, situation rooms, and epidemiological bulletins, strengthening the epidemiological surveillance of dengue and other arboviruses.
WHO also provides advice on risk assessment and risk communication.
WHO risk assessment
Dengue is a mosquito - borne viral disease (arbovirus) that has the potential to cause serious public health impact. The virus that causes this infection has been circulating in the region of the Americas for decades10 due to the widespread distribution of the Aedes spp. mosquitoes (mainly Aedes aegypti), with epidemics occurring cyclically every 3 to 5 years. Several dengue outbreaks have been documented previously in the Region.

This arbovirus can be carried by infected travellers (imported cases) and may establish new areas of local transmission in the presence of vectors and a susceptible population. As they are arboviruses, all populations living in areas with the presence of Aedes aegypti are at risk, however, their impact largely affects the most vulnerable people, in which the arboviral disease programs do not have enough resources to respond to outbreaks.

The consequences of the current high transmission scenario depend on several factors, including the current capacities for a coordinated public health response and clinical management, the early start of the arbovirus season in the southern hemisphere, high mosquito densities and the possible impact of climate change and El Nino phenomenon in the southern hemisphere, lack of vector surveillance and control activities during the COVID-19 pandemic and high proportion of the susceptible population for arboviruses in the region. The current high transmission scenario for dengue occurs in the context of other ongoing outbreaks and emergencies. The synergic effects of concurrent emergencies may hinder the health system’s capacity to respond to an epidemic of arboviral diseases and therefore affect disease control and proper clinical management, including, but not limited to (i) misdiagnosis, given that  dengue symptoms may be non-specific and resemble other infections, including chikungunya, Zika and measles, potentially leading to inadequate case management;  (ii) overwhelmed healthcare facilities in some areas given high caseload, as well as other concurrent outbreaks of other communicable diseases; and (iii) the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the decrease of available resources to arboviral disease programs and the need for capacity building and training of vector-control and healthcare workers, as well as maintenance and procurement of equipment and insecticides to perform vector control activities.

Dengue is endemic in most countries of South America. However, during the seasonal period in the first half of 2023, where dengue outbreaks have been detected, there has been an increase in the number of cases at levels above the average number of cases recorded in the last five years and the expansion of dengue out of historical areas of transmission.

Aedes spp. mosquitoes are widely distributed in the Region of the Americas, therefore, dengue international spread is likely. Additionally, it is expected that in the second half of 2023, some countries in the Region, especially in Central America and the Caribbean, will have an increase in rainfall, which, depending on its magnitude and impact on dengue-endemic areas, could increase the incidence of the disease and constitute an additional burden of arboviral diseases for health systems in affected areas.

The risk at the regional level is assessed as high due to the widely spread distribution of the vector (especially Aedes aegypti), the continued risk of severe disease and even death, and the expansion out of historical areas of transmission, where all the population, including risk groups and healthcare workers, may not be aware of warning signs.

Information on the circulating dengue virus serotype is limited. It is expected that a large proportion of the population in these areas is naïve to the current virus circulating, which may lead to outbreaks. Moreover, people in these areas may not be aware of warning signs, and the population might delay seeking health care.

In some areas, there is a lack of medical facilities with limited geographical access, making it difficult for people to access basic health care. Especially in these areas, people tend to self-medicate, and in dengue cases ibuprofen, acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin), and other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are contraindicated because they can aggravate gastritis or bleeding and lead to increased mortality risk.  

Other challenges reported by Member States in the Region include but are not limited to stockouts of several essential supplies for prevention and control, lack of reagents and consumables for laboratory diagnosis, and the need for re-training field teams and health workers. In addition, higher transmission rates are expected in the following months due to favourable weather conditions to vector activity in the second half of the year in Central America and the northern hemisphere.

WHO advice
Dengue is caused by the dengue virus (DENV), an RNA virus of the family Flaviviridae. There are four distinct but closely related serotypes of the virus (DENV-1, DENV-2, DENV-3, and DENV-4) - recovery from infection provides lifelong immunity against that serotype. Although most cases of dengue are mild, the sequential infection by more than one serotype increases the risk of developing severe dengue, which includes shock or respiratory distress due to plasma leakage, severe bleeding, organ impairment, and death.

Prevention efforts are highly focused on the surveillance and control of Aedes spp. mosquitoes (the most competent vector in the region). Since vector surveillance and control may be difficult to sustain, especially in areas where DENV is endemic year-round, early detection of severe disease progression and access to proper medical attention is key to lowering severe case rates and, therefore, case fatality rates. Personal protection and source reduction measures should be maintained by communities both at places of work or study and at homes. No specific antiviral treatment exists for chikungunya and dengue. Clinical management is based on supportive care, including fluids and antipyretics; recovery can provide   immunity (for that specific serotype in dengue cases). As symptoms of these arboviruses may overlap, clinical-epidemiological diagnostic may be challenging, and there is cross-reactivity of the immunoglobulin M and G antibodies (IgM and IgG) of dengue and Zika viruses, hindering accurate diagnosis, which can lead to inadequate case management, and compromising efficient epidemiological surveillance. The reason why molecular diagnosis with RT-PCR is recommended.

It is very important that the Member States in the Americas are extremely vigilant and prepared to intensify actions to prevent, early detect, diagnose, and control arboviruses, including training and alerting healthcare workers on the detection of cases and potential complications of these diseases, identification of risk groups for severe disease, appropriate clinical management and follow up of cases to prevent future deaths.  In the second half of 2023, an increase in dengue cases is expected. Targeted integrated vector surveillance, monitoring insecticide resistance in dengue vector and control measures are helpful in reducing transmission rates. As a general precaution, WHO recommends avoidance of mosquito bites, including the use of repellents. The highest risk for transmission of dengue is during the day and early evening.

WHO reiterates to all Member States the importance of strengthening: 1) their laboratory capacity to recognize and confirm the cases timely; 2) their healthcare capacity to rapidly detect and manage cases, and 3) their surveillance capacity to rapidly detect trends on the incidence and implement control measures. It is relevant to maintain close monitoring of the situation in the region with active cross-border coordination and information sharing because of the possibility of cases in neighbouring countries.

WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions for countries in the Americas experiencing the current dengue epidemics based on the currently available information.




Situation at a glance
On 27 June 2023, the IHR National Focal Point of Poland notified WHO of unusual deaths in cats across the country. As of 11 July, 47 samples have been tested from 46 cats and one captive caracal, of which 29 were found to be positive for influenza A (H5N1). Fourteen cats are reported to have been euthanized, and a further 11 died, with the last death reported on 30 June. The source of the exposure of cats to the virus is currently unknown and epizootic investigations are ongoing. Sporadic infection of cats with A(H5N1) has previously been reported, but this is the first report of a high numbers of infected cats over a wide geographical area within a country. As of 12 July, no human contacts of A(H5N1) positive cats have reported symptoms, and the surveillance period for all contacts is now complete. The risk of human infections following exposure to infected cats at the national level is assessed as low for the general population, and low to moderate for cat owners and those occupationally exposed to H5N1-infected cats (such as veterinarians) without the use of appropriate personal protective equipment. WHO continues to monitor the situation and work in close collaboration with the animal and public health sectors, regional agencies, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH), and other partner agencies in Poland.
Description of the situation

On 27 June 2023, the IHR National Focal Point of Poland notified WHO of unusual deaths in cats across the country. As of 11 July 2023, a total of 47 samples have been tested from 46 cats and one caracal (Caracal caracal). Of these 47 samples, 29 (62%) were positive for influenza A(H5N1). Positive samples were reported from 13 geographical areas within the country.

Some cats developed severe symptoms including difficulty in breathing, bloody diarrhoea, and neurological signs, with rapid deterioration and death in some cases. In total, 20 cats had neurological signs, 19 had respiratory signs, and 17 had both neurological and respiratory signs. 

Fourteen cats are reported to have been euthanized, and a further 11 died.  Post-mortem exams on a small number of cats are suggestive of pneumonia. According to the information available, the last known death among cats was reported on 30 June .

Genomic analysis of 19 viruses sequenced from this outbreak showed that they all belonged to the H5 clade 2.3.4.4b and were highly related to each other. Also, the viruses are similar to influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b viruses which have been circulating in wild birds and which caused outbreaks in poultry recently in Poland. 

The source of exposure of cats to the virus is currently unknown and epizootic investigations are ongoing. There are several possibilities for the source of infection, among which the cats could have had direct or indirect contact with infected birds or their environments, ate infected birds, or ate food contaminated with the virus. Authorities are investigating all potential sources and to date have not ruled out any. Of the 25 cats for which the information is available, two were outdoor cats, 18 were indoor with access to a balcony, terrace, or backyard, and five were indoor cats with no access to the outside environment. Seven cats are reported to have had the opportunity for contact with wild birds. 

This is the first report of high numbers of cats infected with avian influenza A(H5N1) spread over a wide geographical area within any country.  Sporadic infections in domestic cats with A(H5N1) viruses, including A(H5N1) H5 clade 2.3.4.4b viruses, have been reported previously, following close contact of the cats with infected birds or from ingesting meat of infected birds.

Epidemiology
Since the end of 2021, an unprecedented number of H5N1 outbreaks among poultry and wild birds has been reported worldwide. As of June 2023, the clade 2.3.4.4b viruses have become dominant in Asia, Europe, the Americas and Africa. Alongside wild bird and domestic poultry infections, there have been increased detections in non-avian species, including wild terrestrial (often scavenging) and marine mammals and occasionally in farmed or captive mammalian species, likely through contact with infected live or dead birds or their environments. 

Since 2020, 12 human cases of avian influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b virus detections have been reported to WHO, four of which were severe cases and eight were mild or asymptomatic. It is unclear if the detection of the virus in these mild or asymptomatic cases resulted from infection or temporary contamination of the nasal passages. Most humans infected with A(H5N1) viruses have resulted from direct or indirect contact with infected live or dead poultry. Human infection with influenza A(H5N1) viruses can cause severe disease and is fatal in some cases.

Public health response
Response measures have been implemented by the national authorities in Poland. These include:

Under the guidance of the public health authorities in Poland, all owners of infected cats are provided with a health self-assessment questionnaire and requested to self-monitor for symptoms of influenza-like illness (ILI) or acute respiratory illness (ARI) for 10 days since last contact with infected cat. As of 12 July, 70 individuals who had been in contact with confirmed cats have completed self-monitoring and none reported symptoms.   
Providing regular updates on the situation and sharing information and updates with partners, including international organizations.
Epizootic investigations are underway to understand the epidemiological situation in cats and the likely source of exposure of cats to the virus.
Preventive measures have been taken to prevent the occurrence of disease in humans by issuing publicly available general precautions for cat owners and individuals who have contact with sick animals suspected of avian influenza infection. 
WHO continues to monitor the situation and work in close collaboration with the animal and public health sectors, regional agencies, FAO, WOAH, and other partner agencies in Poland and globally.

WHO is evaluating the existing candidate vaccine viruses (CVVs) of A(H5N1) through the WHO Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS) to ensure valid CVVs are developed and available for pandemic preparedness purposes.

WHO risk assessment
To date, human A(H5N1) infections following contact with an infected cat have not been documented. Avian Influenza A(H5N1) virus detections in humans remain unusual, and sustained human-to-human transmission has not been documented.

To date, no symptomatic human contact of infected cats has been reported in Poland despite potentially close contact between cats and owners,  and the capacity to detect a human case in contact with an infected cat is adequate in the country. 

Therefore, based on current information, the risk of human infections following exposure to infected cats at the national level is assessed as low for the general population, and low to moderate for cat owners and those occupationally exposed to A(H5N1)-infected cats (such as veterinarians) without the use of appropriate personal protective equipment.

Based on the current information, the risk for humans at the regional level is assessed as low, due to: i) avian influenza surveillance activities in animals in Europe being strengthened since September 2022, when the unprecedented geographical extent (37 European countries affected) resulted in 50 million poultry being culled in affected establishments; and (ii) Currently, there are no reported instances of human infection with the A(H5N1) virus acquired from cats, although A(H5N1) infection in domestic cats has been confirmed in Poland.

Due to the uncertainties related to this event, including the source of infection, the risk assessment may change.

WHO advice
The reports of these events do not change the current WHO recommendations on public health measures and surveillance of influenza.

Due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect and monitor virological, epidemiological and clinical changes associated with emerging or circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal) health and timely virus-sharing for risk assessment.

All individuals exposed to animal influenza viruses, and all contacts of confirmed human cases, should monitor their health for the duration of the known exposure period with additional seven days at a minimum.

All those exposed to known infected poultry, wild birds or other animals, or to farms under suspicion, should be registered and placed under close monitoring by local health authorities. This will facilitate the early detection of illness and timely clinical case management. If a person is suspected of having zoonotic influenza, the health authorities must be notified, and appropriate clinical case management should be provided.

Public health and animal health authorities should collaborate closely in the areas of information sharing, joint risk assessment, and response to outbreaks of zoonotic influenza at the human-animal interface, adhering to the One Health approach.

FAO, WHO and WOAH have issued a joint situation analysis and advice to countries in relation to ongoing avian influenza outbreaks in animals and the risk posed to human health.  FAO, WHO and WOAH continue to review the situation, monitoring the rapidly evolving nature of the virus, and updating recommendations for curbing its spread, in addition to working with countries in preparedness and response, and facilitating collaboration across countries and sectors. The spread of the virus to five continents speaks to the need for global cooperation and alertness to protect animals, people, and economies.

WHO does not recommend any restrictions on travel and/or trade with Poland based on available information on this event.





Situation at a glance
Since the Disease Outbreak News published on 31 May 2023 which reported enterovirus, Echovirus 11 (E-11) infection in France, additional Member States in the European Region have notified WHO of cases of E-11 among newborns. As of 26 June 2023, Croatia, Italy, Spain, Sweden, and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland have reported cases of E-11 infection confirmed in newborns. Further investigations and public health responses are being implemented in each of these Member States. This Disease Outbreak News provides updates on the event and the public health response implemented in the reporting and non-reporting countries in the European Region. Based on the limited information available, WHO assesses the public health risk for the general population to be low, while we continue to encourage countries to monitor for and report on cases. Health facilities caring for newborns should familiarize themselves with the signs and symptoms of echovirus and maintain vigilance for potential healthcare-associated infections and outbreaks.
Description of the situation

On 5 May 2023, France reported an increase in cases of severe neonatal sepsis associated with Enterovirus (Echovirus-11 (E-11)). A total of nine cases of neonatal sepsis with hepatic impairment and multi-organ failure with seven deaths were reported between July 2022 and April 2023 from four hospitals in three regions of France.

As of 26 June 2023, Croatia reported one confirmed case of E-11 infection from a cluster of enterovirus diseases in neonates detected in June 2023, Italy has reported seven cases of E-11 infection confirmed in neonates between April and June 2023, Spain reported two cases of E-11 infection in 2023, Sweden reported five E-11 cases with four cases of meningoencephalitis among infants due to E-11 infection between 2022 and 15 June 2023, and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (the UK) reported two cases in March 2023. 

France:

As of 26 June 2023, France has reported nine cases of severe E-11 neonatal sepsis associated with hepatic impairment and multi-organ failure confirmed by enterovirus Reverse Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR) testing of blood samples, throat swabs, nasopharyngeal swabs, cerebrospinal fluid samples, and/or post-mortem biopsies from three French metropolitan regions between July 2022 and April 2023.  Six of the nine cases occurred in 2022 (July, October and December, n=2 each) and three cases in 2023 (January (n=1) and April (n=2)). Eight cases were preterm (born before 37 weeks gestation) in four pairs of twins born at 31 and 36 weeks. Of the nine cases, there were seven reported deaths (Case Fatality Ratio (CFR) = 78%), two have been discharged from the hospital and remain under follow-up. Detailed investigation of the cases was published in the Disease Outbreak News on 31 May 2023. No additional similar cases of severe neonatal E-11 infections have been reported so far.

Croatia:

Croatia reported one confirmed case of E-11 infection from a cluster of enterovirus disease in neonates detected in June 2023 from two separate maternity hospitals. Further investigations are ongoing with no additional cases reported so far.    

Italy:

As of 26 June 2023, seven cases of neonatal E-11 infection have been confirmed in Italy between April and June 2023. Three out of the seven cases were admitted to the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU). At the time of reporting, one case remains in the NICU, one is showing clinical improvement and one has been discharged. Two more cases, who tested positive at screening were without significant symptoms. Further investigation of the remaining two cases is ongoing with clinical and epidemiological data pending.   

Spain:

Two cases of E-11 infection have been reported in Spain as of 26 June 2023. These cases were preterm twins born in January 2023. Both cases were admitted to the NICU after birth with one recorded death and a diagnosis of severe enterovirus infection with probable vertical transmission, while the second case was discharged from the hospital without sequelae.

Enterovirus infection was laboratory confirmed in blood samples in both cases, one case also tested positive in stool samples and nasopharyngeal aspirates. Further sequencing and phylogenetic analysis of the virus are awaited.

According to data available at the Spanish National Centre for Microbiology, E-11 has been in circulation in Spain in 2022 and 2023, but available E-11 data does not indicate an increase in incidence or severity in neonates.         

Sweden:

Sweden reported four cases of infants with meningoencephalitis due to E-11 between the beginning of 2022 and 15 June 2023.  In addition to the four infant cases reported through the mandatory reporting of viral meningoencephalitis, one infant case of E-11 was detected in 2022 through enhanced enterovirus surveillance. None of the reported cases are twins.  

Epidemiological analysis of trends in probable causative agents in cases reported with viral meningoencephalitis in 2022 did not indicate any findings beyond the expected.

The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland:

The United Kingdom reported two cases of E-11 infection in one pair of twins in March 2023. Both cases presented with several clinical conditions including hepatitis and multiorgan failure with rapid deterioration from the fourth day of birth to the tenth day when they were deceased.  Laboratory testing confirmed the presence of enterovirus, typed as E-11. Currently, the United Kingdom is not aware of new additional E-11 cases.

Other countries in WHO European region:

So far, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Netherlands, and Norway have reported that in 2022 and 2023 no increase of E-11 associated with cases of neonatal sepsis has been observed.

Epidemiology
Enteroviruses are a group of viruses that can cause various infectious illnesses and are responsible for annual epidemics. Illness is usually mild but has been found to affect neonates differently and sometimes more severely than older children and adults. There are multiple transmission routes, particularly in the neonatal period, including intrapartum by exposure to maternal blood, secretions, and/or stool, or postnatally from close contacts with infected caregivers.   

Echovirus 11 (E-11) is a positive-strand RNA virus belonging to the genus Enterovirus of the family Picornaviridae. Like other enteroviruses, E-11 infections are associated with a wide spectrum of illnesses, ranging from mild nonspecific symptoms to systemic disorders such as rash, febrile illness to severe neurological disorders, including meningitis, encephalitis and acute flaccid paralysis (AFP).

Echovirus 11 (E-11) has been reported to cause severe illnesses in neonates and infants, with high morbidity and mortality. In addition, E-11 can be transmitted vertically from mother to child, increasing the difficulty of controlling infections. The infections can cause severe inflammatory illnesses in neonates, including severe acute hepatitis with coagulopathy. E-11 and other enteroviruses have been circulating continuously in the European region.

Public health response
The European Centers for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) and WHO held a collaborative call with Member States to discuss the event and encourage both affected and non-affected Member States to collaborate with further information sharing.

France:

Continuous information sharing regarding this event among France and other Member States (through the European Non-Polio Enterovirus Network (ENPEN)), the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) and WHO is ongoing.  Also, there are ongoing plans to publish the complete genome sequence of the virus on GenBank, the National Institutes of Health genetic sequence database.  Details of the reported cases (complete genome sequence available for the French cases) have been published in Eurosurveillance.

Croatia:

Isolation and typing of the enterovirus from the mentioned clusters detected in June 2023 are ongoing.

Italy

Details of two of the confirmed cases have also been published in Eurosurveillance. Further investigations of the confirmed cases and other probable cases are ongoing. The event is currently being monitored with response and prevention activities ongoing.

Spain:

Further investigations of the confirmed cases are ongoing.  

The United Kingdom:

Further sequencing and phylogenetic analysis of the virus are awaited. 

Sweden

The Public Health Agency of Sweden has sent an informational letter to all child clinics, microbiological laboratories and regional medical officers to enhance awareness and increase specimen collection suitable for enterovirus typing.

WHO risk assessment
Between 2022 and June 2023, a few Member States in the European Region reported the detection of positive enterovirus, especially Echovirus 11 (E-11) cases. These include Croatia, France, Italy, Spain, Sweden and the UK. So far, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, the Netherlands, and Norway have reported no increase of E-11 associated with cases of neonatal sepsis has been observed in 2022 and 2023. 

Based on the limited information available, WHO assesses the public health risk for the general population to be low. However, asymptomatic carriage and shedding of infectious viruses are a feature of enterovirus infection.

Although some countries have enterovirus surveillance, there is no systematic European-wide enterovirus surveillance in place in the European Region. It is therefore difficult to estimate the extent of the current severe neonatal E-11 infections or background rates for circulation of E-11 viruses in the population. Without enterovirus surveillance, only the most severe cases will probably be detected through active efforts to test and type specimens from such cases. As non-polio enterovirus infection is often not a notifiable disease in Member States, additional cases of severe neonatal enterovirus infection may have gone undiagnosed and/or unreported.   

WHO advice
Non-polio enteroviruses are common and distributed worldwide. Although infections often are asymptomatic, some may present with respiratory tract infections. Some of the reported cases had fever and apnoea and progressed to hepatocellular and renal failure within the neonatal sepsis presentation. These viruses are also associated with occasional outbreaks in which an unusually high proportion of patients develop clinical disease, sometimes with serious and fatal consequences. Clinicians managing neonates and young infants presenting with circulatory shock should consider an underlying diagnosis of sepsis and perform appropriate diagnostic investigations, including testing for enteroviruses.

Health-care staff working with samples suspicious of non-polio enteroviruses should be properly trained to collect, store, and transport various samples. If samples are referred domestically and/or internationally for confirmation, typing, or sequencing purposes, appropriate national and international regulations on the transport of infectious substances should be strictly followed. Laboratories that perform sequencing should consider sharing genetic sequence data through publicly accessible databases.  

No specific antiviral therapy for echovirus infection is available, and treatment focuses on preventing complications. Health facilities caring for obstetric and neonate populations should familiarize themselves with the signs and symptoms of echovirus infection and maintain vigilance for potential healthcare-associated infection cases and outbreaks in hospital units providing neonatal care. Health facilities and healthcare workers should implement infection prevention and control measures with a focus on adherence to WHO “Your 5 Moments for Hand Hygiene”, visitor restriction, re-enforcing the importance of cleaning and disinfecting the environment and use of contact precautions when caring for neonates suspected or confirmed to have E-11. For suspected and confirmed neonatal cases consider isolation, ensure utensils (e.g., cup, spoon, syringe) for supplemental feeding are not shared and educate mothers and caregivers on personal hygiene and handwashing during care of newborn including diaper change. WHO provides training for health and care workers on preventing maternal and neonatal infections in health facilities, which can be accessed on Open WHO.   




Situation at a glance
On 7 June 2023, Brazil notified the World Health Organization (WHO) of a fatal laboratory-confirmed human case of infection with a swine-origin influenza A(H1N1) variant (v) virus in the inner state of Paraná. Sporadic human cases of influenza A(H1N1)v have been reported previously, including from Brazil. According to the International Health Regulations (IHR) 2005, a human infection caused by a novel influenza A virus subtype is an event that has the potential for high public health impact and must be notified to the WHO. Based on the information currently available, WHO considers this a sporadic case, and there is no evidence of person-to-person transmission of this event. The likelihood of community-level spread among humans and/or international disease spread through humans is low.
Description of the situation

On 7 June 2023, the Brazil IHR National Focal Point (NFP) notified WHO of a fatal human infection caused by a swine-origin influenza A(H1N1)v virus detected by the National Influenza Centre (NIC), Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, Rio de Janeiro.

The patient was a 42-year-old woman with underlying medical conditions who lived near a swine farm. She developed fever, headache, sore throat, and abdominal pain on 1 May 2023 and was hospitalized on 3 May with a severe acute respiratory infection. On 4 May, the patient was admitted to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) and she passed away on 5 May.

Ongoing investigations reported that the patient did not have any direct contact with pigs, however, two of her close contacts worked at the swine farm. The two contacts did not develop respiratory disease and tested negative for influenza. To date, no human-to-human transmission associated with this case has been identified. 

During hospitalization, a nasopharyngeal swab sample was collected from the patient for influenza and SARS-CoV-2 testing, as part of regular respiratory virus surveillance activities. Real-time Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR) was conducted at the State of Paraná Central Public Health Laboratory, where the sample was subtyped as an influenza A/H1 virus. The sample also tested positive for a swine influenza A virus marker by RT-PCR. 

The specimen was forwarded to the National Influenza Centre Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, in Rio de Janeiro, where further complementary analyses and genomic sequencing were performed. Samples received at the NIC on 25 May were confirmed to be an influenza A(H1N1)v virus by sequence analysis on 30 May. The recovered genome has a high identity (99%) with the haemagglutinin (HA) of other Influenza A(H1N1)v viruses previously detected in the municipality of Toledo state of Paraná in 2022. In addition, it has 96% identity with the HA of viruses collected from pigs in Brazil in 2015.

On 8 June, after the Brazilian Ministry of Health (MoH) notified WHO under the IHR, the NIC started the process to send the patient's samples to the WHO Collaborating Centre at the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (US CDC) for further characterization. 

Epidemiology
Influenza A(H1) viruses are enzootic in swine populations in most regions of the world. When an influenza virus that normally circulates in swine is detected in a person, it is called a “variant influenza virus”. H1N1, H1N2 and H3N2 are major subtypes of swine influenza A viruses in pigs and occasionally infect humans, usually after direct or indirect exposure to pigs or contaminated environments.

Human infections with variant viruses tend to result in mild clinical illness, although some cases have been hospitalized with more severe disease and some have been fatal.

To date, sporadic human infections caused by influenza A(H1N1)v and A(H1N2)v viruses have been reported in Brazil, and there has been no evidence of sustained human-to-human transmission.

This is the first human infection caused by an influenza A(H1N1)v virus reported in 2023 in Brazil, and the third human infection reported in the state of Parana (the first was detected in 2021 and the second in 2022).

Public health response
Local and national health authorities implemented the following public health measures:

Conducting further epidemiological investigations, and follow-up of contacts in the family, community, and health care facilities.
Monitoring the surveillance of influenza-like illness (ILI) and severe acute respiratory infections (SARI) in the surrounding municipalities (within the same health region), particularly influenza virus, seeking to analyze the behavior and trends of respiratory viruses in the region.
Reinforcing the vaccination campaign for seasonal influenza in at-risk groups.
WHO risk assessment
This is a sporadic case based on currently available information and further spread has not been detected.

Limited, non-sustained human-to-human transmission of variant influenza viruses has been described, although ongoing community transmission has not been identified. Current evidence suggests that these viruses have not acquired the ability of sustained transmission among humans.

There is no vaccine for Influenza A(H1N1)v infection currently licensed for use in humans. Seasonal influenza vaccines against human influenza viruses are generally not expected to protect people from influenza viruses that normally circulate in pigs, but they can reduce the likelihood of getting sick with both human and variant influenza viruses.

WHO assesses the risk of international disease spread through humans and/or community-level spread among humans posed by this event as low. The risk level will be amended if warranted by the investigations currently being conducted by national authorities.

WHO advice
Surveillance:

This case does not change the current WHO recommendations on public health measures and surveillance of seasonal influenza.
Due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect virological, epidemiological and clinical changes associated with circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal) health and timely virus sharing for risk assessment.
Continued vigilance is needed within affected and neighboring areas to detect infections in animals and humans. Collaboration between the animal and human health sectors is essential. As the extent of influenza viruses circulating in animals is unclear, epidemiologic and virologic surveillance and the follow-up of suspected human cases should continue systematically. Guidance on the investigation of non-seasonal influenza and other emerging acute respiratory diseases is available on the WHO website.
Vigilance for the emergence of novel influenza viruses of pandemic potential should be maintained. WHO has developed practical guidance for integrated surveillance in the context of the cocirculation of SARS-CoV-2 and influenza viruses.
It is critical that influenza viruses from animals or from people are fully characterized in appropriate animal or human health influenza reference laboratories. Under WHO’s Pandemic Influenza Preparedness (PIP) Framework, Member States are expected to share influenza viruses with pandemic potential on a regular and timely basis with the Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS).
Notification and investigation:

All human infections caused by a novel influenza subtype are notifiable under the IHR, and State Parties to the IHR are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a recent human infection caused by an influenza A virus with the potential to cause a pandemic. Evidence of illness is not required for this report.
In the case of a confirmed or suspected human infection caused by a novel influenza virus with pandemic potential, including a variant virus, a thorough epidemiologic investigation of history of exposure to animals, of travel, and contact tracing should be conducted. The epidemiologic investigation should include early identification of unusual respiratory events that could indicate person-to-person transmission of the novel virus. Clinical samples collected from the time and place that the case occurred should be tested and sent to a WHO Collaboration Centre for further characterization.
Travel and trade:

WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions for Brazil based on available information on this event.
Prevention measures for travelers:

WHO advises that travelers to countries with known outbreaks of animal influenza should avoid farms, contact with animals in live animal markets, entering areas where animals may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with animal excreta. Travelers should also wash their hands often with soap and water. All individuals should follow good food safety and hygiene practices.
WHO does not advise special traveler screening at points of entry or restrictions with regard to the current situation of influenza viruses at the human-animal interface.




Situation at a glance
On 8 June 2023, after two consecutive incubation periods (42 days) without a new confirmed case reported, the Ministry of Health of Equatorial Guinea declared the end of the Marburg virus disease (MVD) outbreak, as per the WHO recommendations. A total of 17 confirmed and 23 probable cases were reported from five districts in four provinces; 12 of the 17 confirmed cases died and all of the probable cases were reported deaths. WHO and partners provided technical support to the government to contain this outbreak through its country office. WHO encourages maintaining most response activities for three months after the outbreak ends. This is to make sure that if the disease re-emerges, health authorities are able to detect it immediately, prevent the disease from spreading again, and ultimately save lives.
Description of the situation
On 13 February 2023, the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare of Equatorial Guinea declared an outbreak of MVD after suspected viral hemorrhagic fever deaths were reported between 7 January and 7 February 2023, and a case tested positive on 12 February for Marburg virus by real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) at the Institut Pasteur de Dakar in Senegal.

From the outbreak declaration until 7 June 2023, 17 confirmed and 23 probable cases were reported in the continental region of Equatorial Guinea. Twelve of the confirmed cases died and all of the probable cases were reported deaths (the case fatality ratio among confirmed cases is 75%, excluding one confirmed case with an unknown outcome).

The last confirmed case admitted to a Marburg treatment center in Bata district in Litoral province was discharged on 26 April, after two consecutive negative PCR tests for MVD. On 8 June 2023, after two consecutive incubation periods (42 days) without a new confirmed case reported, the Ministry of Health of Equatorial Guinea declared the end of the outbreak.

Confirmed or probable cases were reported in five districts (Bata, Ebebiyin, Evinayong, Nsok Nsomo and Nsork) in four of the country’s eight provinces (Centro Sur, Kié-Ntem, Litoral and Wele-Nzas).

Five cases (31%) were identified among healthcare workers, of whom two died (CFR among HCWs: 40%).

Four patients recovered and were enrolled in a survivor care programme to receive psychosocial and other post-recovery support.

Figure 1. MVD cases by week of symptoms onset* and case classification, Equatorial Guinea, as of 7 June 2023.



Figure 2. Map of districts reporting MVD confirmed and probable cases during the outbreak, Equatorial Guinea. 

Epidemiology
Marburg virus spreads between people via direct contact through broken skin or mucous membranes with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected people, and with surfaces and materials such as bedding, and clothing contaminated with these fluids. Healthcare workers have previously been infected while treating suspected or confirmed MVD patients. Burial ceremonies that involve direct contact with the body of the deceased can also contribute to the transmission of Marburg virus.

The incubation period varies from two to 21 days. Illness caused by Marburg virus begins abruptly, with high fever, severe headache, and severe malaise. Severe haemorrhagic manifestations may appear between five and seven days from symptom onset, although not all cases have haemorrhagic signs, and fatal cases usually have some form of bleeding, often from multiple areas.

Although no vaccines or antiviral treatments are approved to treat the virus, Remdesivir was used in this outbreak on compassionate care basis. Supportive care – rehydration with oral or intravenous fluids – and treatment of specific symptoms improve survival. A range of potential treatments are being evaluated, including blood products, immune therapies, and drug therapies.

This was the first documented outbreak of MVD reported in Equatorial Guinea. Another MVD outbreak was recently declared over in the United Republic of Tanzania (for more information, see the Disease Outbreak News published on 2 June 2023). MVD outbreaks have been previously reported in Ghana (2022), Guinea (2021), Uganda (2017, 2014, 2012, 2007), Angola (2004-2005), the Democratic Republic of the Congo (1998 and 2000), Kenya (1990, 1987, 1980) and South Africa (1975).

Public health response
Coordination

Following the official outbreak declaration in the country, the Government of Equatorial Guinea established an emergency response structure to manage the response in the continental region with supporting partners and developed an initial three-month operational response plan.
A transition and recovery plan for a one-year period has been developed. This plan will be implemented under leadership from the Ministry of Health, with support from partners, including WHO.
Partners from the Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN) were mobilized to assist in response activities. Several experts have been deployed through WHO to support case management, laboratory, epidemiology, and surveillance functions.
WHO supported the Ministry of Health in providing training for surveillance activities, including case investigation, contact tracing, active case search in health facilities and the community, and in supervising field teams.
The UN system, including WHO, continues to advocate for the Prevention of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse as it awaits government agreement to undertake community-based activities.
Partner Support

Several partners supported the government-led response through the provision of technical, financial and operational support. These include WHO, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (US-CDC), the Cuban Medical Brigade, the Africa Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (Africa CDC), the International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC), and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF).
Surveillance

WHO supported the establishment of the alert and dispatch center for MVD alert management.
WHO provided training and supportive supervision of surveillance activities, including case investigation and contact tracing and coordinating with healthcare facilities for active surveillance.
Laboratory

With the support of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and WHO, laboratories with RT-PCR capacities were set up initially in Ebebiyin and then in Bata.
MVD diagnostic and sequencing capacities were subsequently implemented in Malabo at the Baney laboratory with support from Institut Pasteur Dakar and WHO, as well as other partners.
WHO continues to support laboratory operations as well as specimen transportation notably through the training of shippers of infectious substances.
Clinical care

WHO supported the MoH in the establishment of the Mondong Treatment Center in Bata and in the coordination of a referral system, including three ambulances that can retrieve suspected and confirmed patients from any district in the region and bring them to the Mondong treatment center.
WHO also supported the MoH in the establishment of a survivor clinic that provides medical and psychological care and testing to survivors.
Infection Prevention and Control (IPC) and WASH (Water, Sanitation and Hygiene)

WHO supported the establishment of the MoH regional IPC task force for coordination of IPC activities which met daily.
In collaboration with MOH and US CDC, WHO supported the development and implementation of the National Strategy for the IPC response which was endorsed by MOH and implemented by key partners including UNICEF and Africa CDC.
WHO developed IPC technical guidance and other products including Standard Operating Procedures, checklists, training materials and tools as needed.
WHO supported the MoH in developing a rapid health care facility evaluation tool on IPC measures in place (such as screening and isolation capacity), including making this tool available online.
WHO provided IPC training modules in the context of MVD, which were adopted and used to train health workers in all the affected districts as well as adopted by key implementing partners.
WHO operational support and logistics (OSL) and UNICEF identified key IPC supplies required (including personal protective equipment, alcohol-based hand rub, etc).
WHO worked with partners to advocate for improved Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in health facilities, in particular water supply and waste management.
WHO supported the establishment, training and implementation of decontamination and safe and dignified burial teams.
WHO recruited and trained five national IPC focal points in Bata, Ebibeyin, Mongomo, Evinayong and Malabo.
Risk Communication and Community Engagement (RCCE)

WHO supported MoH in the development of an RCCE national plan and establish an RCCE coordination with key partners (UNICEF, IFRC, Africa CDC, among others) to ensure timely, relevant and actionable RCCE messaging, and activities reach affected and at-risk populations.
Intensive and tailored public awareness, strategic networking, and capacity building for RCCE national experts, social mobilizers, and community leaders were implemented in all the affected districts. 
Religious leaders, decision-makers, school delegates, volunteers, media professionals, etc. were engaged to enhance community involvement in the response.
Border health and points of entry

On 26 April 2023, WHO organized a webinar with the support of the US-CDC and the International Organization for Migration (IOM) to raise awareness on the necessary border health readiness and response activities in the context of MVD outbreaks for affected and neighboring countries.
Operational support and logistics (OSL)

​WHO has provided operational and logistics support and maintenance of the Marburg treatment centre, including structural rehabilitation, provision of electricity and water, and supply chain management.
WHO established support for fleet management, including three ambulances on standby 24/7 at the Bata treatment centr​e, and approximately 20 vehicles.
WHO has provided essential medicines and supplies to all pillars.
WHO established a central warehouse for essential items in Bata, which supports distribution to other areas.
Readiness and preparedness in neighboring countries

Readiness activities were scaled up in the neighbouring countries of Cameroon and Gabon to detect as early as possible any suspected case. All alerts from these neighbouring countries were investigated to rule out MVD.
WHO developed a readiness checklist to assist neighbouring countries in assessing their level of readiness, and identifying potential gaps and concrete actions to be taken in case of any potential outbreak of filovirus including MVD. The checklist consists of several key components and an average score is calculated to provide readiness scores to each of the identified countries. A second round of readiness assessment across all pillars was conducted for Cameroon and Gabon.
Based on the gaps identified during the assessments, a gap analysis was conducted and shared with Cameroon and Gabon to inform priority readiness activities. The identified gaps were addressed through the optimization of operational capacities and capabilities using various strategies, including trainings, table-top exercises, and simulation exercises. Additionally, experts were deployed to support the implementation of the readiness activities.
WHO risk assessment
In compliance with WHO recommendations, the criteria to declare the end of an outbreak after two maximum incubation periods (42 days) was observed with no new confirmed or probable case of MVD detected.

Based on knowledge of past outbreaks of filovirus disease, there remains a risk of re-emergence of MVD even following the declaration of the end of the outbreak. Undetected transmission of Marburg virus may exist in the country; not all chains of transmission were definitively linked, and one confirmed case was never identified. The initial source of the outbreak has not been identified, and a new emergence of disease is possible, including from interaction with animal reservoirs. The virus may also persist for an extended period in body fluids of survivors, including semen, underlying the importance of their participation in the survivors program, and the support the program provides.

Based on the available information at the end of MVD outbreak in Equatorial Guinea, the risk of MVD remerging is considered as low at the national level, low at the subregional level, regional level and at the global level.

WHO advice
The current WHO recommendation is that most response activities continue for three months after the outbreak ends, to make sure that if the disease re-emerges, health authorities can detect it right away, prevent the disease from spreading, and ultimately save lives.

WHO advises the following risk reduction measures as an effective way to reduce MVD transmission:

Reducing the risk of bat-to-human transmission arising from prolonged exposure to mines or caves inhabited by fruit bat colonies. During work or research activities or tourist visits in mines or caves inhabited by fruit bat colonies, people should wear gloves and other appropriate protective clothing (including masks). During outbreaks, all animal products (blood and meat) should be thoroughly cooked before consumption.
Health facilities should ensure IPC measure programs are in place including screening for cases of MVD, training of health workers on IPC practices, safe injection practices, environmental cleaning and disinfection protocols are in place, decontamination of reusable medical devices and safe waste management. 
Health workers caring for patients with confirmed or suspected MVD should apply transmission-based precautions in addition to standard precautions, including appropriate use of personal protective equipment and hand hygiene according to the WHO 5 moments to avoid contact with patients' blood and other body fluids and with contaminated surfaces and objects.
Surveillance activities should be strengthened to ensure early detection of any future cases.
Raising community awareness of the risk factors for Marburg virus infection and the protective measures individuals can take to reduce human exposure to the virus is key to reducing human infections and deaths. This includes reminders for persons with symptoms to immediately seek care in health facilities to reduce the risk of transmission in the community and to receive treatment, thereby improving chances for recovery. Community and family members should avoid caring for symptomatic individuals at home, avoid touching bodies of people deceased with MVD symptoms, other potentially contaminated items, and surfaces, and encourage them to go to a health facility for assessment and treatment.
WHO advises against applying international travel and/or trade measures to Equatorial Guinea.





Situation at a glance
This Disease Outbreak News was first published on 2 June 2023 and updated on 9 June 2023 to include a risk statement. On 2 June 2023, the Ministry of Health of the United Republic of Tanzania declared the end of its first documented outbreak of Marburg virus disease (MVD). Between 21 March and 31 May, a total of nine cases (eight laboratory-confirmed and one probable) were reported. All cases were reported from Bukoba district, Kagera region. A total of six deaths (case fatality ratio 67%) were reported during the outbreak. In accordance with WHO recommendations, the declaration was made 42 days (twice the maximum incubation period for Marburg virus infection) after the last possible exposure to an MVD probable or confirmed case. WHO encourages countries to maintain most response activities for three months after the outbreak ends. This is to make sure that if the disease re-emerges, health authorities would be able to detect it immediately, prevent the disease from spreading again, and ultimately save lives.
Description of the situation
On 21 March 2023, the Ministry of Health (MoH) of the United Republic of Tanzania officially declared the first MVD outbreak in the country. Between 21 March and 31 May, a total of nine cases, including eight laboratory-confirmed cases and one probable (the index case), were reported (Figure 1). The last confirmed case was reported on 11 April 2023 and the date of sample collection of the second negative PCR test was on 19 April 2023. All cases were reported from Bukoba district, Kagera region, in the north of the country.
Among the confirmed cases, three have recovered, and a total of six deaths (CFR 67%) have been reported, of which five were confirmed and one was a probable case.

Cases ranged in age from 1 to 59 years old (median 35 years old), with males being the most affected (n= 6; 67%). Six cases were close relatives of the index case, and two were healthcare workers who provided medical care to the patients.

On 2 June 2023, the MoH of the United Republic of Tanzania declared the end of the MVD outbreak. This declaration was made 42 days (twice the maximum incubation period for Marburg virus infection) after the last possible exposure to MVD probable or confirmed case.

Figure 1: Distribution of MVD cases (confirmed and probable) by date of symptom onset in the United Republic of Tanzania, as of 31 May 2023.



Figure 2: Map of district reporting MVD confirmed and probable cases in the United Republic of Tanzania, as of 31 May 2023.



Epidemiology
Marburg virus spreads between people via direct contact through broken skin or mucous membranes with the blood, secretions, organs, or other body fluids of infected people and with surfaces and materials such as bedding, and clothing contaminated with these fluids. Healthcare workers have previously been infected while treating patients with suspected or confirmed MVD. Burial ceremonies involving direct contact with the body of the deceased can also contribute to the transmission of the Marburg virus.

The incubation period varies from 2 to 21 days. Illness caused by the Marburg virus begins abruptly, with high fever, severe headache, and severe malaise. Severe haemorrhagic manifestations may appear between five and seven days from symptom onset. However, not all cases have haemorrhagic signs, and fatal cases usually have some form of bleeding, often from multiple areas. 

Early supportive care – rehydration with oral or intravenous fluids – and treatment of specific symptoms and co-infections can improve survival. A range of potential treatments are being evaluated, including blood products, immune therapies, and drug therapies.  

This was the first documented outbreak of MVD reported in the United Republic of Tanzania. There is an ongoing outbreak of MVD in Equatorial Guinea (for more information, please see the Disease outbreak news published on 8 May 2023 in Equatorial Guinea and the United Republic of Tanzania).  Other MVD outbreaks have been previously reported in Ghana (2022), Guinea (2021), Uganda (2017, 2014, 2012, 2007), Angola (2004-2005), the Democratic Republic of the Congo (2000 and 1998), Kenya (1990, 1987, 1980) and South Africa (1975).

Public health response
The MoH, together with WHO and other partners, initiated response measures to control the outbreak and prevent further spread to other regions in the country and neighboring countries. Regular coordination meetings were held to coordinate responses.
Active case search and alert management were implemented, with a total of 243 alerts received as of 30 May, of which 62 MVD suspected cases were detected, and samples were sent for laboratory confirmation. The eight laboratory-confirmed cases were identified, and the remaining samples tested negative.
A total of 212 contacts were identified and monitored with 210 having completed their 21-day follow-up period with no symptoms. Of the remaining two contacts, one developed symptoms and subsequently tested positive for MVD while the other died due to other causes.
The three recovered cases were provided with care and, together with their relatives, received mental health and psychosocial support services (MHPSS) through the survivor programme.
WHO risk assessment
On 2 June 2023, the Ministry of Health of the United Republic of Tanzania declared the end of the MVD outbreak that affected Bukoba district in Kagera region.  This was the first documented MVD outbreak in the country.

MVD is an epidemic-prone disease associated with high case fatality ratios (CFR 24-90%). MVD is caused by the same family (Filoviridae) as Ebola virus disease (EVD) and is clinically similar. In the early course of the disease, clinical diagnosis of MVD is difficult to distinguish from other tropical febrile illnesses because of the similarities in the clinical symptoms. Other viral hemorrhagic fevers need to be excluded, particularly Ebola diseases, as well as malaria, typhoid fever, and dengue. Epidemiologic features can help differentiate between diseases (i.e., exposure to bats, caves, or mining).

Marburg virus has been isolated from fruit bats (Roussettus aegyptiacus) that are present in the United Republic of Tanzania and countries neighboring the affected Kagera region, therefore the same bat species may carry the virus in this region.

Based on the available information at the end of MVD outbreak in the United Republic of Tanzania, the risk is considered as low at national level, low at the subregional level, regional level and at the global level.

WHO advice
WHO encourages countries to maintain most response activities for three months after the outbreak is declared over. This is to make sure that if the disease re-emerges, health authorities would be able to detect it immediately, prevent the disease from spreading again, and ultimately save lives.

WHO advises the following risk reduction measures as an effective way to reduce MVD transmission:

Reducing the risk of bat-to-human transmission arising from prolonged exposure to mines or caves inhabited by fruit bat colonies. During work or research activities or tourist visits in mines or caves inhabited by fruit bat colonies, people should wear gloves and other appropriate protective clothing (including masks). During outbreaks, all animal products (blood and meat) should be thoroughly cooked before consumption.
Health facilities should ensure infection, prevention and control measure (IPC) programmes are in place including screening for cases of MVD, training of health workers on IPC practices, safe injection practices, environmental cleaning and disinfection protocols are in place, decontamination of reusable medical devices and safe waste management. 
Health workers caring for patients with confirmed or suspected MVD should apply transmission-based precautions in addition to standard precautions, including appropriate use of personal protective equipment (PPE) and hand hygiene according to the WHO 5 moments to avoid contact with patients' blood and other body fluids and with contaminated surfaces and objects.
Surveillance activities should be strengthened to ensure early detection of any future cases.
Raising community awareness of the risk factors for Marburg infection and the protective measures that individuals can take to reduce human exposure to the virus are key to reducing human infections and deaths. 
WHO advises against any international travel and/or trade measures in the United Republic of Tanzania. 





Situation at a glance
On 11 May 2023, the United States of America Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (US CDC) notified the Mexico General Directorate of Epidemiology (DGE) of five cases with central nervous system infection (CNSI) in the United States of America. All five cases were females with a history of undergoing surgical procedures performed under spinal anaesthesia in Mexico. The surgeries were performed in two private clinics, located in the city of Matamoros, Tamaulipas state, on the border with the USA. Laboratory test results from samples collected from patients in the USA and Mexico were consistent with meningitis caused by pathogenic fungi. Fungal meningitis is rare but can be fatal and requires immediate medical care. WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation based on the latest available information.
Description of the situation
On 11 May 2023, the US CDC notified the Mexico’s DGE through the International Health Regulations National Focal Point (IHR NFP),  the identification of five female cases with CNSI in the USA, with a history of undergoing surgical procedures performed under spinal anaesthesia in two private clinics in a city in Mexico, bordering the USA.
As of 26 May 2023, the health authorities from Mexico and the USA have reported a total of 20 cases presenting with signs and symptoms compatible with CNSI, including two deaths reported by the US CDC. Patients presented to the hospital with symptoms including headache, fever, nausea, vomiting, sensitivity to light, and fainting after receiving surgical procedures in two private clinics located in the city of Matamoros, Tamaulipas state in Mexico, on the border with the USA between January and April 2023.

The Mexico Epidemiological Diagnosis and Reference Institute (InDRE per its acronym in Spanish) has received five samples of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) that tested positive for a fungus, Fusarium solani by real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Additionally, according to the health authorities from the USA, the laboratory results from nine suspected cases were consistent with meningitis, of which two CSF and two blood samples showed elevated levels of (1,3)-beta-D-glucan, a biomarker for fungal infection.  Two pan-fungal PCR tests were negative.

According to the investigation performed, a total of 547 people had these procedures  between January and April 2023 in the concerned two private clinics, of whom 304 (56%) reside in Mexico, 237 (43%) in the United States, and one in Canada.

Epidemiology
Several species of bacteria, viruses, fungi, and parasites can cause meningitis, an inflammation of the tissues surrounding the brain and spinal cord. Fungal meningitis can develop after a fungal infection spread from somewhere else in the body to the central nervous system. It can be fatal and requires immediate medical care.  While rare, medical and surgical procedures can lead to fungal meningitis if medical devices or medications are contaminated with fungi, or if proper infection prevention control practices are not taken. This type of healthcare-associated infection can lead to severe illness or death. Healthcare-associated fungal meningitis outbreaks have occurred among patients who received spinal anesthesia.
Public health response
The United States of America and Mexico Health Authorities are investigating additional cases that may be associated with this outbreak in both countries. The response measures include:

In the United States of America:

On 8 May 2023, through the Emerging Infections Network , US CDC learned of two unusual meningitis cases in Texas with prior spinal anesthesia.
On 16 May, the US CDC published a level 2 travel health notice related to fungal infections following procedures performed under spinal anaesthesia in Mexico with recommendations for the public and clinicians. Additionally, on 24 May, an interim recommendation for diagnosing and managing cases of suspected fungal meningitis associated with spinal anesthesia administered in Matamoros, Mexico, were also published by the US CDC.
On 17 May, the US CDC published a Health Alert Network related to an outbreak of suspected fungal meningitis in patients who underwent procedures performed under spinal anesthesia in Matamoros, Mexico. 
State and local health departments have initiated contacting and follow-up of people through telephone calls and home visits who are known to have had procedures performed under spinal anesthesia at these two clinics since January 2023. Instructions are given to people to go to their nearest health clinic, urgent care, or emergency room for diagnostic testing including a magnetic resonance imaging  and a lumbar puncture.
In Mexico:

Epidemiological investigations are ongoing in Matamoros, Mexico. In addition, the DGE is working with State Health Services and the Matamoros Health Jurisdiction on operational definitions.
Mexico health authorities are strengthening active epidemiological surveillance for meningitis in Tamaulipas state to achieve timely identification.
On 13 May, Tamaulipas Health Authority closed the two private healthcare facilities where these surgical procedures were performed.
A follow-up of exposed people was initiated through telephone calls and home visits.
On 19 May, the Mexico IHR NFP  notified PAHO/WHO of an outbreak of CNSI associated with spinal anaesthesia  in Matamoros, Tamaulipas state.
WHO risk assessment
Fungal meningitis cases following a medical/surgical procedure are very infrequent and unusual. In 2012, the US CDC investigated a multistate outbreak of fungal meningitis and other infections among patients who received contaminated preservative-free methylprednisolone acetate ( MPA) steroid injections; 753 cases were reported, including 64 deaths in 20 States in the USA.

The source, vehicle, and the transmission route for the current outbreak remains unknown, although the investigations are ongoing. A fungal infection is suspected based on preliminary information provided by the health authorities from Mexico and the USA.

Each year, more than a million people from the USA participate in medical tourism. In 2017, more than 1.4 million Americans sought health care in a variety of countries around the world. These medical tourists commonly travel to Mexico, Canada, and countries in Central America, South America, and the Caribbean. At present, there is no evidence to suggest any secondary spread from these cases of health care associated fungal meningitis The involved healthcare facilities where the procedures were undertaken have been closed since 13 May. However, there is an ongoing investigation and follow up of people who may have been exposed to fungal infections. This may lead to additional cases being reported until the follow up of people exposed to such procedure is completed.

WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and review the risk assessment based on the latest available information.

WHO advice
As  the outbreak's source is yet to be established, WHO Member States must stay vigilant. It is critically important for affected Member States to identify any possible cases, establish the causal chain, and determine if any substandard/falsified products or procedures could be related. Investigation of these cases will assist in rapid containment at the disease source to prevent additional suspected cases.

WHO recommends the continuation of laboratory analyses, case identification and clinical care, follow-up of potentially exposed people, outbreak investigation to identify the agent, the source, the vehicle, and the transmission route, implementation of measures to prevent further infections, and enhancement of Infection Prevention and Control (IPC) measures.

IPC measures in health facilities should be reinforced to prevent healthcare-associated transmission. Attention should be paid to ensure injection safety practices are adhered to, including standards being met for medical device disposal or reprocessing (if reusable). Processes used for the storage, transport, and preparation of sharps, syringes, and vials should be examined to ensure sterility prior to use in local healthcare facilities. Use of multidose vials should be avoided. IPC practices should be reviewed and reinforced in operating theaters to ensure they are adhered to, including appropriate personal protective equipment use, before aseptic procedures, including skin antisepsis for safe administration of spinal anesthesia, as well as ensuring environmental cleaning.

WHO does not recommend any specific different measures for travellers visiting Mexico. In case of symptoms suggestive of meningitis during or after travel, travelers are encouraged to seek medical attention and share their travel history with their healthcare provider.

WHO advises against the application of any travel or trade restrictions on Mexico and the United States of America based on the current information available on this event.



Situation at a glance
On 5 May 2023, France reported an increase in cases of severe neonatal sepsis associated with Enterovirus (Echovirus-11 (E-11)). A total of nine cases of neonatal sepsis with hepatic impairment and multi-organ failure were reported between July 2022 and April 2023 from four hospitals in three regions of France. As of 5 May 2023, seven cases have died and two were still hospitalized in neonatal unit. The current increase in incidence and severity in neonates, associated with a recombinant lineage of E-11 that previously was not detected in France, and is considered unusual due to the extremely rapid deterioration and associated case fatality rate amongst the affected babies. Based on the limited information available, WHO assesses the public health risk for the general population to be low, despite the concerning nature of the increase.
Description of the situation
On 5 May 2023, France reported nine cases of severe neonatal sepsis associated with hepatic impairment and multi-organ failure including seven associated deaths. Of these nine cases, eight were preterm (born before 38 weeks of gestation). Four pairs of twins were affected and presented with late-onset neonatal sepsis (occurring after one week of birth to three months).

The cases were reported from four hospitals in three regions between July 2022 and April 2023. Of the nine reported cases, six were reported in 2022 (two cases each in July, October, and December) and three were reported in 2023 (one case in January and two cases in April).

All cases presented with one or more clinical signs less than seven days after birth, suggesting a mother-to-child transmission route. The clinical presentation of these cases was considered to be atypical due to their extremely rapid deterioration and the associated case fatality rate. As of 5 May 2023, seven cases have died and two were still hospitalized in the neonatal unit; their short-term prognosis is no longer threatened.

Enterovirus reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) testing of all nine cases (including blood samples, throat swabs, nasopharyngeal swabs, cerebrospinal fluid samples, and/or post-mortem biopsies) confirmed the presence of enterovirus, typed as Echovirus-11 (E-11). E-11 maternal infection was confirmed by RT-PCR and enterovirus genotyping by analyzing blood samples from four out of five mothers. All tested mothers presented with gastrointestinal signs or fever within the three days before or at delivery.

Sequence analyses of all typed enterovirus infections in 2022 showed the circulation of at least two lineages of recombinant origin, of which the predominant one included all the sequences associated with the nine cases together with sequences associated with non-neonatal or non-severe neonatal infections. Further genetic analyses are ongoing.

According to historical data from 2016 to 2021, E-11 represented 6.2% (3 of 48) of reported severe neonatal infections with known enterovirus type while this proportion increased to 55% (11 of 20) in 2022.

Epidemiology
Enteroviruses are a group of viruses that can cause various infectious illnesses and are responsible for annual epidemics. Illness is usually mild but has been found to affect neonates differently and sometimes more severely than older children and adults. There are multiple transmission routes, particularly in the neonatal period, including intrapartum by exposure to maternal blood, secretions, and/or stool, or postnatally from close contacts with infected caregivers. Echovirus 11 (E-11) is a positive-strand RNA virus belonging to the genus Enterovirus of the family Picornaviridae.

The infections can cause severe inflammatory illnesses in neonates, including severe acute hepatitis with coagulopathy. 

Public health response
On 28 April 2023, the French national reference centre for enteroviruses and parechoviruses informed clinicians and virologists involved in the care of newborns, to reinforce the diagnosis and surveillance of enterovirus infection in neonates with severe sepsis through a professional network. In particular, the message focused on:

What to do in newborns with a picture of severe sepsis of indeterminate aetiology to sensitize about the risk of transmission.
Clinicians were invited to systematically consider enterovirus infection in neonates with severe liver failure, enterocolitis, meningoencephalitis, or myocarditis.
Close monitoring of liver function, cardiac function, neurological function, and risk of enterocolitis were recommended in neonates with severe neonatal sepsis of undetermined aetiology.
Clinicians were also invited to undertake an early notification of referral hospitals in order to discuss potential therapeutic options.
The risk of maternal transmission of E-11 was raised and recommendations made to monitor the infant closely for at least 7 days if the mother was known to have had an infection before or during childbirth.
The importance of collecting additional samples (blood, stool, and nasopharyngeal) in newborns and mothers for enterovirus.
The importance of genotyping EV-positive samples: Clinical virologists were invited to send EV-positive samples in a prospective manner, especially from patients presenting with severe clinical signs. Samples are sent to the National Reference Laboratories for genotyping and genome studies.
Continuous information sharing regarding this event among France and other Member States (through the European Non-Polio Enterovirus Network (ENPEN)), the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) and WHO is ongoing. To date, no comparable increase of E-11 cases associated with neonatal sepsis has been observed in countries that have reported to the ECDC (Belgium, Denmark, Netherlands, Norway, and Spain) in 2022 and 2023.

WHO risk assessment
A review of the epidemiological data collected from 2016 to 2022 in France through routine surveillance of enterovirus infections among hospitalized patients showed a significant increase in incidence and mortality for all severe neonatal infections associated with E-11, defined as infections with at least one organ failure and/or requiring admission to intensive care.

A total of 443 enterovirus neonatal infections (severe and non-severe types) including seven deaths (case fatality rate, (CFR) 1.6%) were reported in France in 2022. Of these, 72% (n=317) had a known enterovirus type.  E-11 was the predominant circulating enterovirus type (all ages included) and was identified in 30.3% (96 of 317) of neonatal infections (severe and non-severe) with known enterovirus type. It has been continuously detected since June 2022.

Of the reported neonatal infections in 2022, 4.5% (22 of 443) were classified as severe. Of these 20 had known enterovirus types. E-11 represented 55% (11 of 20) of these cases as compared to 6.2% (3 of 48) of cases with known enterovirus type out of the total reported severe neonatal infections (n=62) between 2016 to 2021. 

In 2022, there were seven deaths (case fatality rate, (CFR) 1.6%) out of the cumulative 443 enterovirus neonatal infections recorded in 2022 (six associated with E-11), compared to seven deaths (CFR 0.4%), out of 1774 neonatal infections from 2016 to 2021(none associated with E-11). As mentioned above, there have also been seven deaths so far in 2023.

Sequence analyses showed the circulation of at least two lineages of recombinant origin, of which the predominant one included all the sequences associated with the nine severe cases together with sequences associated with non-neonatal or non-severe neonatal infections. This new variant of E-11 had not been observed in France before July 2022, nor elsewhere based on available sequences on Genbank, as of 28 April 2023. As of 5 May 2023, E-11 sequences retrieved from samples collected in 2023 all belong to this predominant lineage. Although higher pathogenicity of this new lineage cannot be excluded, the severity of infections may also be explained by the young age, prematurity, and the absence of maternal immunity. Further analyses are warranted to delineate the characteristics of this recombinant virus.

Based on the limited information available, WHO assesses the public health risk for the general population to be low. However, asymptomatic carriage and shedding of infectious viruses are a feature of enterovirus infection. Echovirus infection was confirmed in four out of five mothers by analyzing blood samples three days before or at delivery. There have been previous reports of severe E-11 infection in twin neonates, however, the observation of four sets of twins amongst nine cases is more than expected. As non-polio enterovirus infection is often not a notifiable disease in Member States, additional cases of severe neonatal enterovirus infection may have gone undiagnosed and/or unreported.

WHO advice
Non-polio enteroviruses are common and distributed worldwide. Although infections often are asymptomatic, some may present with respiratory tract infections. Symptoms include fever, runny nose, and body weakness. These viruses are also associated with occasional outbreaks in which an unusually high proportion of patients develop clinical disease, sometimes with serious and fatal consequences. Clinicians managing neonates and young infants presenting with circulatory shock should consider an underlying diagnosis of sepsis and perform appropriate diagnostic investigations, including testing for enteroviruses.

Health and care workers working with samples suspicious of non-polio enteroviruses should be properly trained to collect, store, and transport various samples. If samples are referred domestically and/or internationally for confirmation, typing, or sequencing purposes, appropriate national and international regulations on the transport of infectious substances should be strictly followed. Laboratories that perform sequencing should consider sharing genetic sequence data through publicly accessible databases.

No specific antiviral therapy for echovirus infection is available, and treatment focuses on preventing complications. Health facilities caring for neonate populations in France should familiarize themselves with the signs and symptoms of enterovirus and maintain vigilance for potential healthcare-associated infection cases and outbreaks in wards providing neonatal care. 

Healthcare facilities and health and care workers in units working with neonates should implement infection prevention and control measures with a focus on adherence to WHO “Your 5 Moments for Hand Hygiene,” visitor restriction, re-enforcing the importance of cleaning and disinfection of the environment and use of contact precautions when caring for neonates suspected or confirmed to have E-11. For confirmed neonates consider isolation, ensure pacifiers and baby bottles are not shared and educate mothers on personal hygiene and handwashing during change of diapers. WHO provides training for health and care workers on preventing maternal and neonatal sepsis which can be accessed on Open WHO.




Situation at a glance
In mid-May, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland reported to the World Health Organization (WHO) the detection of avian influenza A(H5) virus in a poultry worker at a farm in England where poultry was infected with high pathogenicity avian influenza (HPAI) A(H5N1) viruses. Another detection was reported in a second individual performing culling operations on the farm. Both detections were later confirmed by additional testing as A(H5N1). Both cases were asymptomatic and detected as part of an ongoing enhanced surveillance study of asymptomatic workers exposed to poultry infected with avian influenza. All the workers at this farm and their contacts have been identified; none of the contacts have reported symptoms, and no other influenza cases have been identified. The United Kingdom Health Security Agency (UKHSA) has not detected evidence of human-to-human transmission. Based on the available information, WHO considers these as sporadic detections of avian influenza viruses among humans with no evidence of person-to-person transmission to date. Thus, the likelihood of international disease spread through humans is considered to be low. Given the widespread circulation in birds and the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO stresses the importance of global surveillance to detect virological, epidemiological and clinical changes associated with circulating influenza viruses which may affect human (or animal) health.
Description of the situation

In late April, the UKHSA was notified by the Animal and Plant Health Protection Agency (APHA) of an outbreak of HPAI (H5N1) on a poultry farm in England, United Kingdom. The human cases were detected through an ongoing enhanced surveillance study of asymptomatic workers exposed to poultry infected with avian influenza.

The UKHSA Rapid Investigation Team were deployed to the farm in early May 2023 to recruit exposed participants for the study. Of the 24 eligible persons, one tested positive for influenza A (with no detection of human seasonal subtypes H1 or H3) on the first sample self-taken at the premises. Two further nasopharyngeal samples collected from the same person tested negative for influenza A by a UKHSA regional laboratory and by the UKHSA national influenza reference laboratory. The participant remained clinically asymptomatic throughout.

An update from the United Kingdom authorities to WHO in mid-May 2023, notified of an additional case from the same farm as influenza A(H5) positive on two separate samples. This second person was a poultry culler exposed to infected birds at the same farm. The poultry culler worked on the farm in early May using personal protective equipment (PPE). The case was clinically assessed and remains asymptomatic. The case was treated with oseltamivir and was negative on respiratory sampling taken on the last day of isolation.

Sequencing later confirmed the virus detected in both individuals as A(H5N1). All samples from these two individuals were negative for seasonal influenza viruses. All other study participants remain well and have tested negative for influenza A on their samples to date. Follow-up of contacts has been completed. The affected farm is one of the first recruited in the ongoing enhanced surveillance study of asymptomatic workers exposed to poultry infected with avian influenza.

Work to determine whether these are infections or not (i.e., could instead be due to transient mucosal contamination of the nose with virus particles) is underway, though it may be difficult to reach a conclusion.

Epidemiology
Animal influenza viruses normally circulate in animals but can also infect humans. Infections in humans have primarily been acquired through direct contact with infected animals or contaminated environments. Depending on the host type, influenza A viruses can be classified as avian influenza, swine influenza, or other types of animal influenza viruses.
Avian, swine, and other animal influenza virus infections in humans may cause disease ranging from mild upper respiratory tract infection to more severe disease and may be fatal. Conjunctivitis, gastrointestinal symptoms, encephalitis and encephalopathy have also been reported.

Laboratory tests are required to diagnose human infection with influenza. WHO periodically updates technical guidance protocols for the detection of zoonotic influenza using molecular methods, e.g. Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Evidence suggests that some antiviral drugs, notably neuraminidase inhibitors (oseltamivir, zanamivir), can reduce the duration of viral replication and improve prospects of survival in some cases.

In 2023, Europe has been experiencing a large epidemic of A(H5N1) viruses in birds, with outbreaks reported in domestic birds, wild birds, and mammals across 24 countries. Outbreaks in wild and domestic birds continue to be reported through May 2023.
Public health response
The United Kingdom implemented the following public health measures:

Coordination and response: Since late April 2023, the standard measures for control of avian influenza in England were applied in the affected poultry farm. Situational assessment and response to human detection was coordinated by UKHSA and Public Health Scotland and undertaken by local health protection and National Health Service clinical services.

Surveillance: A follow-up response including passive and active surveillance of exposed workers was undertaken for the first detection. For the second detected case, close contacts were offered chemoprophylaxis, swabbing, and were requested to self-isolate for ten days since their last exposure, reporting information about their health conditions. This second case was isolated until the negative swab result.

Laboratory: Further samples have been obtained from the second case for analysis in a reference laboratory in Scotland. Virus characterization and genomic analysis are in process by the Respiratory Virus Unit, UKHSA/Scottish reference laboratory.

Infection prevention and control: In the affected farms, measures related to the control of the outbreak have been undertaken, including on-site slaughter of the birds, the destruction of contaminated materials that could carry the virus, and cleaning and disinfection of the facilities. All participants involved in the culling process wore personal protective equipment.

As per standard practice for confirmed infected poultry premises in the United Kingdom, a ten-kilometre surveillance zone, and a three-kilometre protection zone were declared by the United Kingdom Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs around the infected premises. The zone will remain in place for at least 21 days after preliminary cleansing and disinfection completion. It will not be lifted until surveillance activities, including clinical inspections of all commercial premises in the zone, have been undertaken.

WHO risk assessment
The two reported individuals with influenza A(H5N1) detection in their samples have remained asymptomatic and tested negative for influenza in their most recent samples to date. Their close contacts were asymptomatic and the follow-up period has been completed.

Both cases were detected as part of an ongoing enhanced surveillance study of asymptomatic workers exposed to poultry infected with avian influenza. In these cases, detections may have resulted from either transient respiratory tract contamination (with no virus replication) or asymptomatic infection. Further testing (e.g., serology) is needed to confirm infection.

Whenever avian influenza viruses are circulating in birds, humans who are exposed to these birds or their environments are at risk of infection.Sporadic human cases and transient contaminations of humans are rare, but not unexpected in such contexts. Thus far, there is no evidence of person-to-person transmission in this incident. Although both reported cases were asymptomatic in this instance, previous A(H5N1) infections have resulted in severe infections in humans.
Based on the available information, WHO assesses that the risk for the general population posed by this virus is low, and for occupationally exposed persons it is low to moderate.

WHO advice
The reports of these events do not change the current WHO recommendations on public health measures and surveillance of influenza. Due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, and their widespread circulation in birds, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect and monitor virological, epidemiological, and clinical changes associated with emerging or circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal birds and mammals) health and timely virus sharing for risk assessment.

When avian influenza viruses are circulating in an area, people involved in high-risk activities such as sampling infected birds or non-human mammals, culling, and disposing of infected animals, eggs, litters, and cleaning of contaminated premises should be trained on the proper use of and provided with appropriate PPE. All persons involved in these tasks should be registered and monitored closely by local health authorities for at least seven days following the last day of contact with infected animals or their environments. Those who develop respiratory symptoms should be rapidly sampled. Testing of asymptomatic exposed individuals could also be considered on a case-by-case basis, depending on available resources and objectives.

In the case of a confirmed or suspected human infection caused by a novel influenza virus with pandemic potential, including a variant virus (infection with a swine influenza A virus), a thorough epidemiologic investigation (even while awaiting the confirmatory laboratory results) of history of exposure to animals, of travel, and contact tracing should be conducted. The epidemiologic investigation should include early identification of unusual respiratory events that could signal person-to-person transmission of the novel virus. 

Clinical specimens collected from the case should be tested and sent to a WHO Collaboration Centre for further characterization. WHO recommends that all people involved in work with poultry or birds should have a seasonal influenza vaccination to reduce the risk of potential recombination events.

Travellers to countries with known outbreaks of animal influenza should avoid farms, contact with animals in live animal markets, entering areas where animals may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with animal faeces. 

General precautions include regular hand washing and following good food safety and good food hygiene practices. Should infected individuals from affected areas travel internationally, their infection may be detected in another country during travel or after arrival. If this were to occur, further community-level spread is considered unlikely as this virus has not acquired the ability to transmit easily among humans. 
All human infections caused by a novel influenza subtype are notifiable under the International Health Regulations (IHR) and State Parties to the IHR (2005) are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a recent human infection caused by an influenza A virus with the potential to cause a pandemic. Evidence of illness is not required for this report.

WHO does not recommend any restrictions on travel and/or trade for the United Kingdom based on available information on this event.




Situation at a glance
This Disease Outbreak News was first published on 16 May 2023 and later updated on 17 May 2023 to correct the number of cases, deaths, and the number of cases with PCR testing. On 5 April 2023, the National IHR Focal Point for the United Kingdom informed WHO of an increase in severe myocarditis in neonates associated with enterovirus infection in Wales. Between June 2022 and April 2023, ten hospitalised neonates with a positive enterovirus Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) test were found to have myocarditis. Seven of the ten cases had further subtyping, with either coxsackie B3 or coxsackie B4 identified. As of 5 May 2023, one patient was still hospitalised, and one had died. Although enterovirus infections are common in neonates and young infants, the reported increase in myocarditis with severe outcomes in neonates and infants associated with enterovirus infection is unusual.
Description of the situation
On 5 April 2023, the National IHR Focal Point for the United Kingdom informed WHO of an increase in severe myocarditis in neonates and infants associated with enterovirus infection in Wales.

Between June 2022 and April 2023, ten neonates, under 28 days of age, presented with a picture consistent with  myocarditis and a positive enterovirus PCR. Seven cases were treated in intensive care, and one case died before transfer to tertiary care. Cases presented with features of sepsis, myocarditis, or in cardiorespiratory arrest. The peak incidence of cases was in November 2022, with sporadic cases in other months.

Enterovirus PCR testing of all ten cases (with either blood, throat swab, nose swab, nasopharyngeal aspirate or cerebrospinal fluid samples) confirmed the presence of an enterovirus, subtyping (where available) to either coxsackie B3 or coxsackie B4.

Critical care support including intubation, ventilation and circulatory support was given to the patients who went to intensive care.

As of 5 May 2023, one patient was still hospitalised and one had died.

The reported increase in severe myocarditis in neonates and infants associated with enterovirus infection is unusual. In the tertiary hospital covering the South Wales region, two other similar cases have been identified in the 6 years prior to June 2022.

A further five cases have been identified over the same period in the Southwest of England. No additional information is currently available about these cases. Details of five of the cases from South Wales and three of the additional cases from Southwest England have recently been published (Ng et al., 2023).

Epidemiology
Myocarditis is an inflammation of the heart muscle (myocardium). The most common cause of myocarditis is viral infection (e.g., Enteroviruses), but it can also be caused by a bacterial infection, a reaction to a drug or an autoimmune disease. Myocarditis symptoms include new and persistent chest pain, shortness of breath and heart palpitations (racing or pounding heartbeat).

Enteroviruses can cause a number of infectious illnesses and are responsible for annual epidemics. These are usually mild but have been found to affect neonates differently, and often more severely, than older children. There are multiple transmission routes, particularly in the neonatal period. The reported incident represents an increase in both the number and severity of enterovirus (coxsackieviruses) infections in infants under the age of one month. There is increased morbidity and mortality associated with the current incident. 

Public health response
On 28 February 2023, pediatricians in the South Wales region were alerted about the recent cases, with advice to consider myocarditis in infants and neonates presenting in shock. A briefing note to clinicians, microbiologists, health boards and public health teams was sent from Public Health Wales on 3 May 2023, following an incident meeting in Wales on 26 April 2023.

An Incident Management Team set up by the United Kingdom authorities are reviewing the evidence from all English Regions and United Kingdom countries and agree on the next steps for response. Epidemiological investigations are ongoing.

WHO risk assessment
According to the authorities of the United Kingdom, a review of past data from the previous six years from the same tertiary care centre in Wales, United Kingdom, has identified only two similar cases prior to June 2022 (which may or may not be linked to the current incident).

Based on the limited information available at this point, WHO assesses the public health risk for the general population to be low. However, asymptomatic carriage and shedding of infectious virus is a feature of enterovirus infection and there was little evidence in this case series of maternal infection prior to or during delivery. As enterovirus infection is often not among the notifiable diseases in Member States, additional cases of severe, neonatal enterovirus infections might have gone undiagnosed and/or unreported elsewhere.

WHO advice
Non-polio enteroviruses are common and distributed worldwide. Although infections often are asymptomatic, others present with mild to moderate respiratory tract infections. Symptoms include fever, runny nose and body weakness. These viruses are also associated with occasional outbreaks in which an unusually high proportion of patients develop clinical disease, sometimes with serious and fatal consequences – in this instance myocarditis. Clinicians seeing infants and neonates presenting in shock may consider a diagnosis of myocarditis and consider testing for enteroviruses.

No specific antiviral therapy is available, and treatment focuses on prevention of complications. As there is no vaccine for this virus, control measures during outbreaks are focused on classical hygiene measures including frequent handwashing and disinfection of soiled clothing and surfaces. In certain situations, it may be advisable to close child-care facilities and schools to reduce the intensity of transmission.

WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions to United Kingdom based on the information available for this event.





Situation at a glance
Equatorial Guinea and the United Republic of Tanzania have been responding to separate outbreaks of Marburg virus disease (MVD) since early February and late March 2023, respectively. In Equatorial Guinea, from 13 February to 1 May 2023, 17 laboratory-confirmed MVD cases and 23 probable cases have been reported. The last confirmed case was reported on 20 April. Among the laboratory-confirmed cases, there are 12 deaths (Case Fatality Ratio (CFR) 75%).For one confirmed case, the outcome is unknown. Among the confirmed cases, four have recovered. All of the probable cases are dead. The most affected district is Bata in Litoral province, with 11 laboratory-confirmed MVD cases reported. In the United Republic of Tanzania, between 16 March to 30 April 2023, a cumulative total of nine cases including eight laboratory-confirmed cases and one probable case have been reported. The last confirmed case was reported on 11 April 2023. A total of six deaths (CFR 66.7%) have been reported, including one probable case and five among the confirmed cases. Among the confirmed cases, three have recovered. All cases have been reported from Bukoba district, Kagera region. Health authorities in both countries have shown strong political commitment. In recent weeks they have further strengthened critical response functions, such as disease surveillance, including at points of entry; laboratory activities; clinical case management; infection prevention and control; risk communication and community engagement; and operations support and logistics with support of WHO and partners. WHO continues to monitor the situation in these two countries closely and to support the responses.
Description of the situation
Equatorial Guinea:

Since the declaration of the outbreak on 13 February 2023, a total of 17 laboratory-confirmed cases of MVD and 23 probable cases have been reported as of 1 May (Figure 1). Among laboratory-confirmed cases, 12 deaths were recorded (CFR 75%). For one confirmed case, the outcome of the illness is unknown. All probable cases are dead. Five districts (Bata, Ebebiyin, Evinayong, Nsok Nsomo and Nsork) in four of the country’s eight provinces (Centro Sur, Kié-Ntem, Litoral and Wele-Nzas) have reported confirmed or probable cases (Figure 2). The most affected district is Bata in Litoral province, with 11 laboratory-confirmed MVD cases reported. 
Among the confirmed cases, four have recovered and five have been reported among healthcare workers, of whom two died.

Among the reported cases, many are linked within a social network/gathering or by geographic proximity, however, the earlier presence of cases and/or clusters across multiple districts without clear epidemiologic links may indicate undetected virus transmission.

There are currently no confirmed cases in the Marburg treatment centre following the most recent discharge of a patient on 26 April 2023. This brings the total of survivors to four since the outbreak was declared. 

Figure 1. MVD cases by week of symptom onset* and case classification, Equatorial Guinea, between 13 February to 1 May 2023.

Among MVD laboratory-confirmed cases with age and sex information (n = 16), the majority occurred among females (10/16; 62.5%), while the most affected age group is 40-49 years (6/16; 37.5%), followed by the age groups 30-39 years (3/16; 18.8%), 10-19 years (2/16; 12.5%), and 0-9 years (2/16; 12.5%).

In the last 21 days (from 11 April to 1 May 2023), two confirmed cases were reported from Bata district (Figure 3). These cases had a known epidemiological link to a confirmed case, through a family cluster or through a healthcare setting. 

Figure 2. Map of Equatorial Guinea districts reporting confirmed and probable MVD cases or affected district reporting contacts with cases, between 13 February to 1 May 2023 .


Figure 3. Map of district reporting MVD confirmed cases in the last 21 days (11 April  - 1 May 2023), Equatorial Guinea.



The United Republic of Tanzania:

Since the declaration of the MVD outbreak on 21 March 2023, a total of nine cases (eight laboratory-confirmed and one probable case) have been reported as of 30 April 2023 (Figure 4). Among the total cases, six deaths were recorded (CFR 66.7%). Among the confirmed cases, three have recovered, and two have been reported among healthcare workers, one of whom died .

In the last 21 days, from 10 to 30 April, one confirmed case was reported on 11 April.  This case was the mother of a previously reported MVD case, a child of 18 months old, who died on the same day. The mother was quarantined as soon as MVD was detected in the child in March. No further contacts linked to this case have been reported. There are currently no confirmed cases in the treatment centre in Bukoba following the discharge of the confirmed patient on 21 April 2023. This brings the total of survivors to three since the outbreak was declared.

Figure 4: Distribution of MVD cases (confirmed and probable) by date of symptom onset in the United Republic of Tanzania, as of 30 April 2023. 

Figure 5: Map of district reporting MVD confirmed and probable cases in the United Republic of Tanzania, as of 30 April 2023.



All cases are reported from Bukoba district in Kagera Region. 

Cases ranged in age  from 1 to 59 years old (median 35-year-old), with males being the most affected (n= 6; 66.7%).

Epidemiology
Marburg virus spreads between people via direct contact through broken skin or mucous membranes with the blood, secretions, organs, or other bodily fluids of infected people and with surfaces and materials such as bedding, and clothing contaminated with these fluids. Healthcare workers have previously been infected while treating patients with suspected or confirmed MVD. Burial ceremonies involving direct contact with the deceased's body can also contribute to the transmission of the Marburg virus.

The incubation period varies from 2 to 21 days. Illness caused by the Marburg virus begins abruptly, with high fever, severe headache, and severe malaise. Severe haemorrhagic manifestations may appear between five and seven days from symptom onset. However, not all cases have haemorrhagic signs, and fatal cases usually have some form of bleeding, often from multiple areas. 

Although no vaccines or antiviral treatments are approved to prevent or treat the virus, Remdesivir is being used on a modified, monitored emergency-use basis in Equatorial Guinea. Early supportive care – rehydration with oral or intravenous fluids – and treatment of specific symptoms and co-infections can improve survival. A range of potential treatments are being evaluated, including blood products, immune therapies, and drug therapies.  

This is the first reported outbreak of MVD in both Equatorial Guinea and the United Republic of Tanzania. Other MVD outbreaks have been previously reported in Ghana (2022), Guinea (2021), Uganda (2017, 2014, 2012, 2007), Angola (2004-2005), the Democratic Republic of the Congo (2000 and1998), Kenya (1990, 1987, 1980) and South Africa (1975).
Public health response
In Equatorial Guinea:

Coordination 
• The Government activated a regional public health emergency operation center in Bata under the leadership of the Minister of Health and the Minister Delegate.
• The MoH developed a national operational response plan and is currently organising regular meetings to coordinate response activities at the national, regional, and district levels.
• Partners from the Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN) were mobilized to assist response activities. Several experts have been deployed through WHO to support case management, laboratory, epidemiology, and surveillance functions.
• The UN system, including WHO, continues to advocate for the Prevention of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse as it awaits government agreement to undertake community-based activities.

Partner Support
• Several partners are supporting the government-led response through the provision of technical, financial and operational support. These include WHO, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (US-CDC), the Cuban Medical Brigade, the Africa Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (Africa CDC), the International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC), and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF).

Surveillance
• The alert and dispatch center for MVD alert management across the region developed by the MoH, with support from WHO, is operational. However, the daily level of alerts reported remains low. 
• WHO is supporting the MoH in training and supportive supervision of surveillance activities, including case investigation and contact tracing and coordinating with healthcare facilities for active surveillance. 
• WHO is coordinating with the US-CDC and the Cuban Medical Brigade on human resources and activity distribution. 

Laboratory 
• With the support of the US-CDC, and WHO, a laboratory with RT-PCR capacities is set up in Bata for MVD diagnostic and national staff continue to be trained. 
• WHO is supporting the strengthening of sample collection and sample transportation system, to ensure quality and timely testing of samples.  
• WHO continues to work with the MoH and support partner coordination efforts towards establishing  Marburg testing and sequencing capacity in Malabo. 

Clinical care
• WHO continues to support the MoH in the operations of the Mondong Treatment Center in Bata. In addition to the 18 individual beds, two cubes1  were installed for improved patient care and a well-stocked pharmacy was put in place.
• WHO continues to support MoH in the coordination of a referral system, including three ambulances that can retrieve suspected and confirmed patients from any district in the region and bring them to the Mondong treatment center.
• WHO is supporting the MoH in the establishment of a survivor clinic that provides medical and psychological care and testing to survivors.
• WHO provides continual training of local clinical and hygienist staff and provides clinical mentorship at the treatment centre.

Infection Prevention and Control (IPC) 
• WHO continues to support the MoH regional task force for coordination of IPC activities and a national strategy for the IPC response.
• WHO continues to support the MoH in providing supervision and mentorship to complete evaluations and improvement plans at priority healthcare facilities and training of health workers. 
• WHO continues to work with partners to advocate for improved Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) in health facilities, in particular water supply and waste management.
• WHO continues to support the decontamination of healthcare facilities, including  training of teams in priority hospitals.
• WHO has recruited and trained five national IPC focal points in Bata, Ebibeyin, Mongomo, Evinayong and Malabo. 
• Safe and dignified burials teams have been established in Bata and Ebibeyin. Training of these teams on taking oral swabs of the deceased is on-going and needs to be scaled up. 

Risk Communication and Community Engagement (RCCE) 
• WHO is coordinating with other key partners to ensure timely, relevant and actionable RCCE messaging, and activities reach affected and at-risk populations. (UNICEF, IFRC, Africa CDC, among others).
• WHO is supporting public awareness and capacity building for RCCE national experts, social mobilisers and community leaders (such as civil society organizations, religious leaders, and women groups).
• Intensive public awareness and sensitization sessions have been conducted to sensitize decision makers in Malabo and affected communities  in Mongomo District.  
• Community engagement with religious leaders, and with school delegates have been intensified.
• An RCCE national plan for (April-June 2023) has been developed with partners. Implementation is ongoing in all affected districts responding to the outbreak. Preparedness and readiness activities are ongoing in Malabo.
• Media networks in Bata have been engaged to understand and amplify protective messages to communities in the local languages, and in French and Spanish.

Border health and points of entry
• WHO is supporting health authorities in convening key travel and transport partners to strengthen capacities and preventive measures at points of entry.
• On 26 April 2023, WHO organized a webinar with the support of the US-CDC and the International Organization for Migration (IOM) to raise awareness on the necessary border health readiness and response activities in the context of MVD outbreaks for affected and neighboring countries.

Operational support and logistics (OSL)
• WHO has provided operational and logistics support and maintenance of the Marburg treatment centre, including structural rehabilitation, provision of electricity and water, and supply chain management.
• WHO has established support for fleet management, including three ambulances on standby 24/7 at the Bata treatment centre, and approximately 20 vehicles. WHO has provided essential medicines and supplies to all pillars. Procurement is ongoing. 
• WHO has established a central warehouse for essential items in Bata, which supports distribution to other areas. 

Readiness and preparedness in neighboring countries 
• WHO developed a readiness checklist to assist neighbouring countries in assessing their level of readiness, and identifying potential gaps and concrete actions to be taken in case of any potential outbreak of filovirus including MVD. The checklist consists of several key components and an average score is calculated to provide readiness scores to each of the identified countries. A second round of readiness assessment across all pillars was conducted for Cameroon and Gabon. As of 3 May 2023, the sub-region's overall readiness capacity was evaluated at 66%. 
• Based on the gaps identified during the assessments, a gap analysis was conducted and shared with Cameroon and Gabon to inform priority readiness activities. The identified gaps would be addressed through the optimization of operational capacities and capabilities using various strategies, including trainings, table-top exercises, and simulation exercises. Additionally, the deployment of experts would be employed to support the implementation of the readiness activities.
In the United Republic of Tanzania:


Coordination
• The Ministry of Health holds daily response meetings to discuss the ongoing response activities. These meetings are attended by heads of pillars and partners 
• Resource mobilization activities by the Ministry of Health, in collaboration and support from WHO and UNICEF, are ongoing
• The MoH continue capacity building efforts for the regional response team .
• Prevention of sexual misconduct activities are ongoing at the country level. This include briefing of all Emergency Prepared and Response (EPR) new comers, signature and display of code of conduct at any WHO event, refresher for all WHO personnel, printing of awareness materials,  for both partners, and community. 
• WHO also supports the Inter-agency protection of sexual exploitation, abuse, and harassment (PSEAH) network in   facilitating community awareness sessions and ensuring that the reporting mechanism is well known to all community members. In addition,  WHO ,in coordination with the Inter-agency PSEAH network conducted the PSEAH Rapid risk assessment along with  risk mitigation measures. 

Surveillance
• Contact tracing activities ongoing: As of 30 April, a cumulative of 212 contacts have completed 21 days follow up. 
• Active case search and alert management is ongoing. The daily level of alerts reported remains low. As of 30 April, a total of 176 alerts have been reported since the start of the outbreak. 

Laboratory
• Capacity building activities are ongoing to train the regional laboratory officers on Marburg specimen management and analysis.

Case management and IPC 
• No new hospitalizations have taken place since the last case was discharged on 21 April. However, suspect cases identified continue to be isolated and receive treatment while awaiting for MVD testing.
• Supervision and orientation on proper donning and doffing of personal protective equipment (PPE) is ongoing

RCCE
• Activities include public awareness through radio, mass sensitization and information dissemination on MVD to Community Health Workers and community leaders in Bukoba district 
• The MoH continues to provide information on MVD through social media platforms.
• Ongoing tracking of rumors and misinformation is being performed using established community-based platforms.
• Information Education and Communication material continues to be reviewed and disseminated, as well as off-line social listening findings (Africa Infodemic Response Alliance, Afya call center, community polling survey)

Border health and points of entry
• Activities to enhance screening at points of entry (PoE) are ongoing, including for domestic travellers to identify any suspected or probable cases of MVD. As of 30 April, over 250 000 people have been screened.
• Relevant PoE have been assessed and capacities enhanced through the provision of health education materials, hand washing equipment, and medical supplies and infrastructure for screening and isolation.

Operational support and logistics (OSL)
• With support from WHO, medical supplies including thermo-scanners, spray pumps, surgical masks, face shields, burial bags, and other PPEs have been provided. 
• Following a joint assessment with UNHCR, WHO is currently supporting a proposal of eight beds isolation unit for UN staff in the UNHCR compound in Kigoma region.

Readiness and preparedness in neighboring countries 
• First round of WHO readiness assessment was conducted for Burundi, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Kenya, Rwanda, and Uganda. As of 3 May 2023, the overall readiness capacity for this sub-region was evaluated at 70%.
• Based on the gaps identified during the assessments, a gap analysis was conducted and shared with the mentioned five countries to inform priority readiness activities. The identified gaps would be addressed through the optimization of operational capacities and capabilities using various strategies, including trainings, table-top exercises, and simulation exercises. Additionally, the deployment of experts would be employed to support the implementation of the readiness activities.
WHO risk assessment
Both countries have reported MVD outbreaks for the first time.

In Equatorial Guinea, while many cases are linked within a social network/gatherings or by geographic proximity, the earlier presence of cases and/or clusters across multiple districts without clear epidemiologic links may indicate undetected virus transmission. The last cases occurred in Bata, the most populated city and economic hub of Equatorial Guinea, with an airport and seaport, posing challenges for the response. The country surveillance system remains suboptimal, with few alerts reported. Additionally, there are population movements between the different districts of the mainland and island regions. Frequent population movements and porous land borders are also reported in the districts bordering Cameroon and Gabon, with suboptimal surveillance at land entry points and countless uncontrolled paths or trails along the border with Cameroon and Gabon. 

In the United Republic of Tanzania, the affected region, Kagera, borders three countries (Uganda to the north, and Rwanda and Burundi to the west) and Lake Victoria, and cross-border population movements may increase the risk of disease spread. Following the recent Ebola virus outbreaks in the Democratic Republic of the Congo from 23 April - 3 July 2022 and from 21 August - 27 September 2022, and Sudan ebolavirus outbreak in Uganda from 20 September 2022 to 11 January 2023, neighbouring countries in the subregion, including the United Republic of Tanzania, have been building preparedness capacities against filovirus diseases.  However, an epidemiological investigation, which is still being carried out,  has not revealed the source of the outbreak  which may pose an additional risk to the population in the affected district. 

In March 2023, WHO assessed the public health risk posed by the MVD outbreaks in Equatorial Guinea and the United Republic of Tanzania as very high at the national level, high at the sub-regional level, moderate at the regional level, and low at the global level.  WHO continues to monitor the situation in these two countries closely.
WHO advice
MVD outbreak control relies on using a range of interventions, such as early isolation and optimized supportive care; surveillance including active case search, case investigation and contact tracing; an optimal laboratory service; infection prevention and control; safe and dignified burial; and social mobilization. Risk Communication and Community engagement is key to successfully controlling MVD outbreaks. Raising awareness of risk factors for infection with Marburg virus and the protective measures that individuals can take is an effective way to reduce human transmission.

Health workers caring for patients with confirmed or suspected MVD should apply IPC measures including, standard and transmission-based precautions and wearing personal protective equipment and performing hand hygiene to avoid contact with the patient’s blood and body fluids and with contaminated surfaces and objects. Health facilities should ensure environmental controls, such as adequate water, sanitation and hygiene, as well as that safe infectious waste management protocols are in place to enable health workers to practice IPC measures. In addition, healthcare facilities should conduct appropriate screening, isolation and referral of suspected cases. WHO recommends that male survivors of MVD practice safer sex for 12 months from onset of symptoms, or until their semen twice tests negative for the Marburg virus. WHO does not recommend isolation of male or female convalescent patients whose blood has tested negative for the Marburg virus.

Based on the available information and current risk assessment, WHO advises to strengthen surveillance in the country through alert management, case investigation, contact listing, tracing and follow up and active case search. In addition, WHO advises to strengthen surveillance at points of entry in the affected areas in Equatorial Guinea and the United Republic of Tanzania for the identification of cases, including through exit screening; to map cross-border population mobility to identify populations in vulnerable situations and target public health interventions; and to provide public health information and advice in all relevant languages in affected districts, at points of entry and in adjacent communities near land borders. Furthermore, suspect, probable and confirmed cases and their contacts should not undertake travel, including international. Based on available information, WHO advises against any other international travel and/or trade measures in Equatorial Guinea and the United Republic of Tanzania. States Parties adopting international travel- and trade-related measures potentially more restrictive than those advised by WHO, are invited to report them to WHO, pursuant to Article 43 of the International Health Regulations (2005).

Before initiating discussion on the 42-day countdown to declare the end of an outbreak, it is recommended that all listed contacts of confirmed or probable cases have completed their 21-day follow-up period with no symptoms. If not, there is still a possibility that a contact becomes a case. 
Once all contacts have completed their 21-day period, the date of last possible exposure to a MVD probable or confirmed case can be set, based on two possible scenarios: 

• The person was a confirmed positive case. He/she recovered and later tested negative by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) on two blood samples collected at an interval of at least 48 hours. The 42-day count starts on the day after the day on which the second negative PCR sample was collected.
• The person was a confirmed or probable MVD case. He/she died and a burial was organized. The 42-day count begins the day after the burial.



Situation at a glance
On 14 April 2023, the Ministry of Health (MoH) of South Sudan declared an outbreak of the hepatitis E Virus (HEV) in Wau city, the capital of Western Bahr el-Ghazal state and one of the largest cities in South Sudan. Between 23 March 2023 and 13 April 2023, a total of 91 HEV suspected cases have been reported from Wau, of which 35 are confirmed; there have been five deaths reported (case fatality ratio [CFR] 5.5%). A multidisciplinary national rapid response team has been deployed by the MoH, supported by WHO, to conduct an epidemiological investigation, determine the extent of the outbreak, identify exposures or risk factors to prevent further spread and implement appropriate preventive measures. HEV is transmitted by the fecal-oral route, mainly through contaminated water. Hepatitis E is found worldwide and is common in developing countries with inadequate water supply, limited access to adequate clean drinking water, poor environmental sanitation, personal hygiene, and limited health services, or areas of humanitarian emergencies. Cases of the hepatitis E virus have been reported in the Bentiu camp for internally displaced persons (IDPs) in South Sudan since 2018, with seasonal upsurges reported yearly, particularly during the rainy season due to floods leading to contamination of drinking water. There is a risk of international spread of the disease as South Sudan shares borders with Sudan and Ethiopia, with substantial traffic between them. The situation is further aggravated by the highly mobile IDP and refugee population, mainly from Rubkona county, Unity State, where the Bentiu IDP camp is located.
Description of the situation
On 14 April 2023, the Ministry of Health of South Sudan declared an outbreak of the hepatitis E Virus in Wau city, the capital of Western Bahr el-Ghazal State.

On 22 March 2023, the MoH was notified of a cluster of cases with jaundice and several deaths. In response, the MoH, supported by WHO, immediately deployed a multidisciplinary national rapid response team to conduct an epidemiological investigation, characterize the event, determine its magnitude, and identify exposures or risk factors to guide control and prevention measures.

Between 23 March 2023 and 13 April 2023, a total of 91 suspected cases of hepatitis E virus were reported and five were fatal (CFR 5.5%). A total of 44 blood samples were collected and tested for HEV IgM antibodies, of which 79% (n = 35) were confirmed. Most cases (93%) have been reported from Nazareth village in Wau South. The median age of cases is 20 years (range 2 – 71 years). Males are most affected, accounting for 74% of all reported cases.  

To validate the positive results, 24 samples were shipped to the Uganda Virus Research Institute and Medical Research Council virology laboratory in Uganda on 17 April 2023. On 24 April 2023, ten of the 24 samples tested positive for HEV by real time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Further detailed investigation and sequencing of samples are ongoing.

Hepatitis E Virus (HEV) cases have been consistently reported in South Sudan since 2018, with recurrent outbreaks in Bentiu, Rubkona county, in the Unity state (central-north part of South Sudan), where the Bentiu IDP camp with around 170 000 individuals is located.

Between 2018 and 29 November 2021, a total of 1707 suspected cases, including 104 confirmed and 12 deaths (five deaths in 2021 alone) were reported in the country. All confirmed cases were tested by PCR at the Uganda Virus Research Institute.

In 2022, 2110 cases were reported in Bentiu IDP camp, Unity state. Following the continued detection of cases in March, April, and October 2022, Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) and the MoH jointly carried out the first hepatitis E vaccination campaign in Bentiu IDP camp. Around 25 000 people, including pregnant women, received the vaccine out of around 170 000 people in the camp. 

As of 19 March 2023, 4009 cases of hepatitis E, including 27 deaths (CFR: 1%) have been reported from Bentiu IDP camp. 

Epidemiology
Hepatitis E is a liver disease caused by the hepatitis E virus (HEV). Hepatitis E is found worldwide and is common in developing countries with limited access to adequate clean drinking water, poor sanitation and personal hygiene, limited health services or in areas of humanitarian emergencies. 

The hepatitis E virus is transmitted by the fecal-oral route, mainly through contaminated water. The risk factors for hepatitis E are related to poor sanitation conditions, allowing the viruses excreted in the feces of infected subjects to reach water intended for human consumption. The infection resolves spontaneously in 2-6 weeks with a 0.5-4% lethality. Fulminant hepatitis, severe liver function impairment caused by HEV, is more common in pregnancy. Pregnant women, especially in their second and third trimesters, are at increased risk of acute liver failure, fetal loss, and mortality: the case-fatality rate can be as high as 20-25% in women in the last trimester of pregnancy. 

Globally, most human infections with HEV are attributed to genotypes 1 and 2, which primarily affect humans in developing countries where contamination of drinking water and lack of adequate sanitation are common, especially in Sub-Saharan Africa and Asia. 

Public health response
The South Sudan MoH continues to work with WHO and partners to ensure response efforts are fully implemented and the people of South Sudan are protected from the risk of HEV. The MoH has initiated the following key response actions:

Leadership and coordination

The Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) Cluster at the state and national levels is tracking the progress of the response. 
WASH partners in hotspot counties (Wau and Jur River) continue to focus on integrating with the Infection Prevention and Control (IPC) and Risk Communication and Community Engagement (RCCE) pillars of the state MoH (SMoH) Taskforce.
The WASH Cluster at the state level has established twice-weekly meetings.
WASH Cluster sub-national coordinators attend SMoH Taskforce meetings to get updates and relay them to partners. 
Immediate activation of the Public Health Emergency Operations Center and all response pillars: coordination, surveillance, case management, WASH, IPC, RCCE, safe and dignified burial, points of entry, and logistics. 
WASH

Wherever required, WASH actors continue to provide technical guidance to health partners in implementing IPC in target health facilities and HEV treatment/isolation centres where the health partner does not have WASH capacity. 
The WASH Cluster at the state level is coordinating with health partners to identify affected households for the provision of WASH-related non-food items and hygiene promotion.
Surveillance and case management

Maintaining the multi-disciplinary national rapid response team in Wau to continue supporting the SMoH and partners to mount a full-scale response in the areas of active case search and line listing of cases, additional sample collection and testing at the Wau Teaching Hospital and the National Public Health Laboratory, case management and IPC measures to health facilities, improving WASH conditions, and IPC in affected communities. 
WHO risk assessment
Cases of hepatitis E virus have been detected in South Sudan and the Bentiu IDP camp since 2018. If the WASH conditions are not improved, the potential risk to human health is high, especially for pregnant women and infants, as mother-to-infant transmission of HEV (during the third trimester of gestation) has been reported.  

The risk at the national level is assessed as high due to:

Poor sanitation and hygiene practices, especially in the IDP camp;
Limited availability of safe drinking water;
Poor access to essential medical services;
The presence of a large IDP population in South Sudan;
Financial constraints impacting capacities to effectively contain the outbreak and limited local capacity to carry out response activities effectively;
The limited availability of vaccine supply;
Population movements;
High risk of death in pregnant women in the absence of HEV vaccine introduction;  
The overall risk at the regional level is considered moderate due to the risk of disease spread between the mobile IDP populations and refugees who cross the borders between South Sudan, Sudan, and Ethiopia. In 2018, genomic sequencing of isolates from HEV cases reported in Bentiu IDP camp showed HEV genotype 1, closely related to strains isolated in the Chad basin and Northern Uganda. This highlights the risk of extensive regional spread in the current context that involves IDPs, refugees, and other populations of humanitarian concern.  

At the global level, the risk is low. 

WHO advice
Prevention is the most effective approach against this disease. At the community level, the most important interventions to reduce HEV transmission are safe drinking water, quality standards for public water supplies, and adequate sanitation. At the individual level, infectious risks can be reduced by maintaining hygiene practices such as washing hands with clean water and soap, especially before handling food, avoiding consumption of water and/or ice of unknown purity, and following WHO hygiene practices for food safety. 

To prevent the spread of acute hepatitis E, WHO recommends improving access to safe drinking water and adequate sanitation. The drinking water quality should be regularly monitored in neighborhoods affected by this epidemic. Coverage of latrines and drinking water sources should be increased to prevent open defecation and to ensure hand hygiene.

Health promotion and prevention activities, as well as ensuring early, appropriate, and equitable healthcare services to combat hepatitis E epidemics, can help improve public health outcomes, especially in resource-limited settings. Since the incubation period for hepatitis E ranges from two to 10 weeks, cases may continue to occur up to 10 weeks after measures to ensure safe water, sanitation, and hygiene promotion have been adopted. 

Interventions must continue to target vulnerable populations by establishing or strengthening antenatal diagnosis for pregnant women with symptoms, improving the population's hygiene conditions, strengthening national capacities for diagnosis and clinical case management, and cross-border collaboration with neighbouring countries. 

There is no specific treatment for the clinical management of patients. There may be specific situations, such as outbreaks, where the risk of hepatitis E or its complications or mortality is particularly high. The recombinant hepatitis E vaccine, Hecolin, has been developed for commercialization and licensed in China and Pakistan. While WHO does not recommend the introduction of the vaccine as part of national routine population immunization programs, WHO recommends that national authorities consider using the vaccine in outbreak settings, including in populations at high risk, such as pregnant women.




Situation at a glance
Measles is endemic in Ethiopia, with cases reported every year. Between 12 August 2021 and 1 May 2023, 16 814 laboratory-confirmed measles cases and 182 deaths – with a Case Fatality Ratio (CFR) of 1.1% - have been reported nationally. From 2021, the annual number of confirmed measles cases has increased significantly, from 1953 in 2021 to 9291(˃375%) in 2022 and 6933 in 2023 as of 1 May. Thus, there was, an almost five-fold increase in confirmed measles cases between 2021 and 2022. Low population immunity, combined with concurrent epidemics, conflict, forced displacement, and other humanitarian crises that disrupt childhood vaccinations, are some factors that may explain the increases. Measles is a highly contagious disease caused by measles virus and it is normally passed through direct contact and through the air. The virus infects the respiratory tract, then spreads throughout the body. It can lead to major epidemics with significant illness and death, especially among vulnerable people, such as young children. In 2022, 45% of all cases were children under 5 years of age. There is no specific antiviral treatment for measles, but an effective and safe vaccine is available for prevention and control. A 95% population vaccination coverage is required to stop measles circulation.
Description of the situation
Since 12 August 2021, all 13 Regional Health Bureaus in Ethiopia have received reports of suspected measles cases in either host communities, displaced populations, or refugees. Since then, and as of 1 May 2023, 16 814 laboratory-confirmed measles cases and 182 deaths, with a CFR of 1.1% have been reported nationally.

From 2021, the annual number of confirmed measles cases has increased significantly, from 1953 in 2021 to 9291(+375%) in 2022, and 6933 so far in 2023 as of 1 May. Thus, there was, a nearly five-fold increase in confirmed measles cases between 2021 and 2022.

There are active measles outbreaks reported in 44 woredas/districts from eight regions: Afar, Amhara, Harari, Oromia, Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples Region (SNNPR), South West Ethiopia Peoples’ Region (SWEPR), Tigray and Somali. The number of measles-affected woredas was 52 (5% of the country’s 1080 woredas) in 2021 and 125 (12%) in 2022.

Between 1 January to 2 April 2023, the Somali region reported 56 laboratory-confirmed and 364 epidemiologically linked measles cases. In 2022, the nationwide measles incidence rate was 82 cases per one million population. The highest reported rates were in the Somali region, which reported 540 cases per one million population. The lack of reporting associated with the crisis in Northern Ethiopia (Tigray) hampers an adequate assessment of the measles situation.

Amongst the confirmed measles cases, only 36% have received one dose or more of the measles-containing vaccine (MCV). According to WHO UNICEF Estimates of National Immunization Coverage (WUENIC) low population immunity (MCV1 and MCV2 coverage in 2021 was estimated at 54% and 46% respectively), combined with concurrent epidemics, conflict, forced displacement, and other humanitarian crises that disrupt childhood vaccinations, are some of the risk factors identified for the increased spread of the disease. Furthermore, cultural beliefs, insufficient awareness, and behavioral characteristics can be a barrier to seeking early treatment and making use of other management strategies for disease management.

The country faces various challenges that could exacerbate the situation further, including high rates of malnutrition (nutritional screening during measles SIAs showed that 0.6% of children had severe acute malnutrition 4.7% had global acute malnutrition (GAM) based on over 15,000 children screened) and, a lack of access to health care in conflict-affected areas increasing the risk of severe disease, displacement and crowded conditions poor hygiene and sanitation access and practices increasing the risk of interpersonal spread. According to the latest predictions by the IGAD Climate Prediction and Applications Centre (ICPAC) and National Meteorological and Hydrological Services (NMHSs) of the Greater Horn of Africa (GHA), Additionally, certain regions affected by drought, such as SNNPR, Oromia, Somali, Afar, and SWEPR, have also reported floods, and around 1.7 million people are at risk of flooding, according to preparedness plans, further risking displacement, disruption of vaccination, and a risk of having people move to crowded settlements increasing the risk of measles circulation.

Figure 1. Total number of measles cases reported by week of onset of symptoms in Ethiopia. 12 August 2021 – 1 May 2023


Figure 2. Woredas reporting active measles outbreaks in Ethiopia from 12 August 2021 to 30 April 2023 



Note: Active outbreak: Three or more measles IgM+ cases reported within one month. Controlled outbreak: No new case reported for the last 30 days after onset of the last case reported.

Epidemiology
Measles is caused by a virus in the paramyxovirus family. The virus infects the respiratory tract, then spreads throughout the body. Measles is a human disease and is not known to occur in animals. It can lead to major epidemics with significant morbidity and mortality, especially among vulnerable people. Among young and malnourished children, pregnant women, and immunocompromised individuals, including those with HIV, cancer or treated with immunosuppressives, measles can cause serious complications, including ear infection, severe diarrhoea, blindness, encephalitis, pneumonia, and death.

Transmission is primarily person-to-person by airborne respiratory droplets that disperse rapidly when an infected person coughs or sneezes. Transmission can also occur through direct contact with infected secretions. Transmission from asymptomatic exposed immune persons has not been demonstrated. The virus remains active and contagious in the air or on infected surfaces for up to two hours. A patient is infectious from four days before the start of the characteristic morbilliform rash, to four or five days after its appearance. There is no specific antiviral treatment for measles; most people recover within 2-3 weeks.

An effective and safe vaccine is available for prevention and control. The measles-containing vaccine’s first dose (MCV1) is given at nine months, while the second dose of the measles-containing second dose (MCV2) is given at the age of 15 months. A 95% population coverage of MCV1 and MCV2 is required to stop measles circulation.

In areas with low vaccination coverage, epidemics typically occur every two to three years and usually last between two and three months. However, their duration varies according to population size, crowding, and the population’s immunity status.

Public health response
The following measures have been undertaken in the country to control the outbreak:

Nationwide measles-preventive supplemental immunization activities (SIA) have been conducted from 22-31 December 2022, in all areas except those affected by conflict (all woredas in Tigray, 12 districts in Oromia, and seven in Benishangul Gumuz).
A total of 14 579 818 under 5 children were vaccinated out of a target of 15 471 740 resulting in 94.2% coverage.
Starting in February 2022, a catch-up measles vaccination campaign was launched, targeting children aged 9 to 23 months. This campaign was conducted in 55 woredas that are high-risk or have been affected by conflict in the Amhara, Oromia, SNNPR, and Somali Regions. The campaign was integrated with vitamin A supplementation and other routine immunization efforts.
Support to improve case management, including capacity building and procurement for medications and supplies.
Intensification of surveillance activities, including active case search by health extension workers, root cause analyses, and detailed investigations in affected woredas.
Intensification of routine immunization through outreach services
Training for frontline responders
Community engagement and risk communication activities are being conducted through a locally tailored approach.
WHO risk assessment
Measles is a highly contagious disease that occurs seasonally in endemic areas. Measles is still common in many developing countries, particularly in parts of Africa and Asia. Over 95% of measles deaths occur in countries with low per capita incomes and weak health infrastructures. Measles remains an important cause of death among young children globally, despite a safe and effective vaccine being available.

There are several challenges that Ethiopia is facing in its efforts to increase national childhood vaccination coverage: conflict, population movement, and an insufficient stock of vaccines at the national level. These challenges are expected to fuel outbreaks and increase the number of cases.

The overall risk at the national level is assessed as high due to the following factors:

Active outbreaks as of 1 May 2023 in 44 woredas in 8 out of 13 regions:  Afar, Amhara, Harari Oromia, SNNPR, SWEPR, Tigray, and Somali;
Sub-optimal immunization coverage and low population immunity,
Weak surveillance systems result in late detection of cases and inadequate outbreak investigations, especially at the community level. Furthermore, active surveillance is inconsistently implemented, likely resulting in under-reporting of cases and deaths;
Poor health awareness in the affected community, resulting in inadequate health promotion and poor health-seeking behavior;
Inadequate case management skills in handling complicated cases, further exacerbated by referral challenges associated with lack of transportation especially for patients from remote areas;
Concurrent disease outbreaks (for example, cholera, pertussis, circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus) have limited the overall capacity and resources to respond to measles transmission;
Concurrent complex humanitarian situations from widespread conflict, displacement, and severe and prolonged drought;
Difficulty accessing and delivering supplies due to the poor road network and insecurity in western parts of Oromia, Benishangul Gumuz, Tigray, Afar, and Amhara;
Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the health system.
At the regional level, the overall risk is assessed as moderate due to the following factors:

Ongoing severe drought in the Horn of Africa;
Ongoing population movement;
Conflict and insecurity in multiple countries in the region;
Weak cross-border surveillance;
Vulnerability of health systems within the region;
Ongoing outbreaks within neighboring countries and suboptimal vaccination coverage.
The risk has been assessed as low at global level.

WHO advice
The key public health strategies to reduce disease burden and transmission include routine vaccination of children against measles, combined with periodic intensification of routine immunization activities (PIRI) and mass immunization campaigns in countries with high morbidity and mortality rates.

There is no specific treatment for measles. Case management of measles focuses on supportive care as well as the prevention and treatment of measles complications and secondary infections. Since measles is highly contagious, patient isolation is important to prevent the further spread of the virus.

Oral rehydration salts should be used as needed to prevent dehydration. All children diagnosed with measles should receive two doses of vitamin A oral supplements, given 24 hours apart, irrespective of the timing of previous doses of vitamin A; 50 000 international units (IU) should be given to infants aged < 6 months, 100 000 IU to infants aged 6-11 months and 200 000 IU to children aged 12 months. This treatment restores low vitamin A levels in acute measles cases that occur even in well-nourished children and can help prevent eye damage and blindness. Vitamin A supplements have also been shown to reduce the number of measles deaths.

Nutritional support is recommended to reduce the risk of malnutrition due to diarrhoea, vomiting and poor appetite associated with measles. Breastfeeding should be encouraged where appropriate.

In unimmunized or insufficiently immunized individuals, the measles vaccine may be administered within 72 hours of exposure to the measles virus to protect against disease. If the disease does subsequently develop, symptoms are usually less severe, and the duration of illness may be shortened.

WHO does not recommend any restrictions on travel or trade to or from Ethiopia.



Situation at a glance
Nigeria is currently experiencing a large outbreak of Lassa fever, with 4702 suspected cases, five probable cases, and 877 confirmed cases between epidemiological weeks 1 and 15 of 2023 (week ending 16 April). Among confirmed cases, there have been 152 deaths (CFR 17%). Lassa fever is endemic in Nigeria and parts of West Africa where the multimammate rat, the main reservoir of the Lassa virus, is common. Responding to the current outbreak is challenging due to the need to respond to multiple emergencies simultaneously. The symptoms of Lassa fever vary widely, and diagnosis can be difficult. Most cases (∼ 80%) are asymptomatic or mild. Still, the infection can result in severe illness and multiple organ dysfunction with or without haemorrhage. Laboratory testing is therefore needed to confirm the diagnosis. Laboratory-confirmed cases have been reported in states bordering Cameroon (Adamawa, Benue, Cross Rivers, and Taraba) and states bordering Benin (Oyo and Niger). The overall regional and global risks are considered low because the primary mode of transmission of Lassa fever is through contact with food or household items contaminated with rat excreta. The rate of human-to-human transmission is low.
Description of the situation
Nigeria is experiencing a large outbreak of Lassa fever, with 4702 suspected cases, five probable cases, and 877 confirmed cases between epidemiological weeks 1 and 15 of 2023 (week ending 16 April). Among confirmed cases, there have been 152 deaths (CFR 17%). This is a 20% increase in confirmed cases in comparison with those reported during the same period in 2022 (733).

Cases have been reported from 101 local government areas (LGAs), in 26 out of 36 states, including the Federal Capital Territory (FCT). A high proportion of confirmed cases (72%) are concentrated in three states: Ondo (32%), Edo (29%) and Bauchi (11%). Laboratory-confirmed cases have been reported in states bordering Cameroon (Adamawa, Benue, Cross Rivers, and Taraba) and states bordering Benin (Oyo and Niger).

Epidemiology
Lassa fever is an acute viral haemorrhagic disease caused by the Lassa virus. It is primarily transmitted to humans either through direct contact with infected Mastomys rodents, or through food or household items contaminated with the urine or faeces of infected rodents. Consequently, the virus is transmitted to humans through cuts and scratches or inhaled via dust particles in the air. Human-to-human transmission can occur through direct contact with an infected person's blood or bodily fluids, but this is rare. Lassa fever can spread in healthcare settings without early recognition and treatment and without adequate infection prevention and control (IPC) measures.

Most cases (∼ 80%) are asymptomatic or mild, but the virus can cause severe disease in the remaining 20% of patients, sometimes associated with multiple organ dysfunction with or without haemorrhage. Lassa fever is difficult to diagnose without proper laboratory tests because it can present with various symptoms, ranging from no symptoms to multiple organ failure and death. 

The case fatality rate is usually between 1% and 15% in patients hospitalized with severe disease. The disease is particularly severe in late pregnancy, with maternal death and/or fetal loss occurring in the third trimester in over 80% of cases. Early supportive care with rehydration and symptomatic treatment is critical and improves survival. The antiviral ribavirin has been used to treat Lassa fever but its efficacy is unproven. There is currently no vaccine that protects against Lassa fever.

The disease was first identified in Nigeria in Borno State in 1969 and is endemic in Nigeria. Transmission occurs throughout the year. However, large seasonal outbreaks occur during the dry season, typically from December to April. 

During epidemiological weeks 1 to 15 of 2023, 42 cases were reported among healthcare workers across 11 states. In week 15 of 2023 (10-16 April), 141 new suspected cases, nine new confirmed cases, and one new confirmed death were reported (CFR 11%).  

Responding to the current outbreak is challenging due to the need to respond to multiple emergencies simultaneously. These include outbreaks of COVID-19, diphtheria, meningitis, measles, and cholera, and ongoing humanitarian crises. In addition, the country is dealing with security challenges that affect the timeliness of the response.

Public health response
The Nigeria Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (NCDC) and health authorities of affected states are leading the response to the outbreak. An NCDC Emergency Operations Center (EOC) was activated on 28 January 2023 and Rapid Response Teams (RRTs) have been deployed to the states of Bauchi, Benue, Ebonyi, Edo, Ondo, and Taraba.  

Response activities include:
Surveillance: detection, monitoring of cases and outbreaks, and laboratory testing;
Case management;
Prevention measures: public education on personal hygiene, food safety, and rodent control in homes and workplaces;
Control measures: administration of antiviral drugs to confirmed cases, supportive care, and contact tracing to identify people who may have been exposed to the virus. 
To improve the response to Lassa fever outbreaks in Nigeria, the NCDC has developed a national action plan, with WHO and other partners, to prevent and control Lassa fever outbreaks. This plan focuses on strengthening surveillance activities, improving and expanding national laboratory capacity, increasing public awareness, and improving the availability of treatment and care for patients. 

WHO risk assessment
Lassa fever is an acute viral hemorrhagic fever endemic to West Africa. Confirmed outbreaks and sporadic cases have been reported in Benin, Burkina Faso, Cote d’Ivoire, Guinea, Ghana, Liberia, Mali, Sierra Leone, Togo and Nigeria. In some regions, Mastomys rodents are consumed as food.

 Although Nigeria is an endemic country for Lassa fever and has developed capacity to manage Lassa fever outbreaks, the current overall risk at the national level is considered high due to several factors:

An increase in the number of confirmed cases compared with the same period in previous epidemic seasons;
Reduced national capacity due to multiple ongoing health emergencies that have overwhelmed the country's health system and limited access to medical resources;
Shortages of personal protective equipment (PPE), resulting in a high risk of healthcare-associated infections;
Delays in sample transport for laboratory testing in several states, delaying confirmation of diagnosis and linkage to treatment and care;
Inadequate health infrastructure, poor sanitation and the continued presence of disease-carrying rodents; and
Lack of awareness and education about Lassa fever among the public and healthcare workers, likely leading to further delays in diagnosis and treatment, increasing the risk of transmission and potential deaths. 
The overall regional and global risks are considered low because the primary mode of transmission of Lassa fever is zoonotic and the rate of human-to-human transmission is low. 

WHO advice
Prevention of Lassa fever requires the promotion of good community hygiene to prevent rodents from entering homes. Effective measures include storing grain and other food in rodent-proof containers, disposing of garbage away from homes, keeping homes clean, and keeping cats in the home. 

In healthcare settings, staff should always follow standard precautions for the prevention and control of healthcare-associated infections when caring for patients, regardless of the presumed diagnosis. These precautions include hand hygiene, respiratory hygiene, personal protective equipment against splashes or other contact with contaminated materials, injection safety, and safe burial rites. 

Healthcare workers caring for suspected or confirmed cases of Lassa fever should take additional infection control measures to avoid contact with the patient's blood or body fluids and contaminated surfaces or materials such as clothing and bedding. When in close contact with patients (within one metre), healthcare workers should wear: face protection (face shield or surgical mask and goggles); a clean, non-sterile, long-sleeved gown; and gloves (sterile for certain medical procedures).

No vaccine for Lassa fever is currently available for use in humans. The antiviral drug ribavirin may be an effective treatment for Lassa fever if given early on in the course of the illness, but data are inconsistent. There is no evidence to support the role of ribavirin as post-exposure prophylactic treatment for Lassa fever. 

WHO continues to advise all countries where Lassa fever is endemic to improve early case detection and treatment to reduce fatalities. 

WHO does not recommend any restrictions on travel or trade to or from Nigeria based on the information in this report.


Situation at a glance
Since 2022, Indonesia has recorded an increase in suspected and confirmed measles cases compared to previous years. Between 1 January and 3 April 2023, a total of 2161 suspected measles cases (848 laboratory-confirmed and 1313 clinically compatible [suspected]) have been reported across 18 of 38 provinces in Indonesia, primarily from the provinces of West Java (796 cases), Central Papua (770 cases), and Banten (197 cases). Measles is endemic in Indonesia and is reported every year. However, in 2022 and 2023, there has been a significant increase in the number of confirmed cases, as compared to those reported annually since 2018: there were 920 reported cases in 2018, 639 in 2019, 310 in 2020, and 132 in 2021. The current outbreak is characterized by suboptimal population immunity, including children without measles vaccination. Supplemental immunization activity (SIA) was conducted in 2022, targeting children <15 years old in high-risk provinces (Aceh, North Sumatera, Riau, Riau Islands, and West Sumatera), 9 – 59 months old in provinces in Java-Bali, and 9 months to 12 years old in the remaining provinces, with efforts to strengthen routine immunization and catch-up activities ongoing to address the population immunity gaps.
Description of the situation

Between 1 January and 3 April 2023, a total of 2161 measles cases (848 laboratory-confirmed and 1313 clinically compatible [suspected]) have been reported across 18 of 38 provinces in Indonesia, primarily from the provinces of West Java (796 cases), Central Papua (770 cases), and Banten (197 cases).

In 2022, a total of 4845 laboratory-confirmed measles cases and six deaths (CFR 0.1%) were reported across 32 of the 38 provinces. The provinces mainly affected were Aceh (978 cases), West Sumatra (859 cases), Riau (500 cases), and East Java (459 cases). Annual trend analysis shows the number of cases reported annually in 2022 and currently in 2023 is higher than usual: there were 920 cases in 2018, 639 cases in 2019, 310 cases in 2020, and 132 cases in 2021 (Figure 1).

Figure 1: Number of measles cases reported by month of onset of symptoms and confirmation category. Indonesia. January 2019 – March 2023.



Source: Indonesia Ministry of Health

In 2022, among the 4845 confirmed measles cases with available age information, 93% (4502) were between 1 and 14 years old. However, a few cases have also been observed in the older age group, with at least 41 cases reported among people over 40. Among the confirmed cases, 67% had not received any dose of measles-containing vaccine (MCV), 6% had received one dose, 7% had received both doses, and vaccination history was unknown for 21 % (991) of confirmed cases (Figure 3).

In 2023, among the 2076 confirmed cases with available age information, 95% (1978) were between 1 and 14 years of age. Among the confirmed cases, 75% had not received any dose of MCV, while 11% had received one dose, 10% had received both doses, and vaccination history was unknown for 3%. Among these 2076 cases, 100% (212) of those younger than 9 months old, 87% (47) 9-12 months, and 66% (1303) of those aged 1-14 years had not received any dose of MCV (Figure 2).

Figure 2: Percentage of vaccination coverage among confirmed measles cases by age group, 1 January to 3 April 2023. Indonesia. (n=2138)



Source: Indonesia Ministry of Health

The current outbreak is mainly characterized by suboptimal population immunity, as evidenced by the increased gap in immunity (Figure 2). According to the WHO/UNICEF Joint Reporting Form (JRF), the vaccination coverage in Indonesia in 2020 was 87% for measles-containing-vaccine first-dose (MCV1) and only 65% for measles-containing-vaccine second dose (MCV2). In 2021, national coverage of MCV1 was 87%, and MCV2 was 59%, with variation in administrative vaccination coverage at the sub-national level; these data indicate a very high number of children are susceptible to measles infection.

Epidemiology
Measles is a human disease caused by a virus in the paramyxovirus family. The virus infects the respiratory tract, then spreads throughout the body. It can lead to major epidemics with significant morbidity and mortality, especially among vulnerable people. Among young and malnourished children, pregnant women, and immunocompromised individuals, including those with HIV, cancer or treated with immunosuppressives, measles can cause serious complications, including severe diarrhea, blindness, encephalitis, pneumonia, and death.

Transmission is primarily person-to-person by airborne respiratory droplets that disperse rapidly when an infected person coughs or sneezes. Transmission can also occur through direct contact with infected secretions. Transmission from asymptomatic exposed immune persons has not been demonstrated. The virus remains contagious in the air or on contaminated surfaces for up to two hours. A patient is infectious from four days before the start of the rash to four days after its appearance. There is no specific antiviral treatment for measles, but most people recover within 2-3 weeks.

An effective and safe vaccine is available for prevention and control. The MCV1 is given at the age of nine months, while the MCV2 is given at the age of 15 months. A 95% population coverage of MCV1 and MCV2 is required to stop measles circulation.

In areas with low vaccination coverage, epidemics typically occur every two to three years and usually last between two and three months. However, their duration varies according to population size, crowding, and the population’s immunity status.

Several measles outbreaks have been reported in Indonesia between 2011 to 2023. One of the biggest outbreaks occurred in East Java province in 2016 where 3765 cases were reported, associated with low vaccination coverage levels.

Public health response
Indonesia conducted supplemental immunization activity (SIA) in 2022, targeting children <15 years old for high-risk provinces (Aceh, North Sumatera, Riau, Riau Islands and West Sumatera), 9-59 months old for provinces in Java-Bali, and 9 months to 12 years old for the remaining provinces.
Active case search and line listing of fever and rash cases is ongoing. Vitamin A is given to those identified with fever and rash during case investigation. 
Human resources have been deployed to the affected provinces to improve surveillance, particularly at the community level.
Efforts are underway to procure reagents needed for laboratory testing enzyme-link immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
Promotion of routine immunization and catch-up activities is taking place via a multisectoral collaboration between the government, the community and partners, including the capacity building of immunization staff, strengthening the routine immunization information system and conducting a routine desk review to evaluate vaccination coverage.
Coordination is taking place with the Indonesian Pediatric Society to disseminate the updated clinical management guidelines to health care workers.
Capacity building on clinical management in the form of online training was conducted in 2022 in collaboration with the Indonesian Pediatric Society.
Job aids have been developed to improve routine immunization coverage.
WHO risk assessment
While measles is endemic in Indonesia and is reported yearly, the magnitude and extent of this outbreak is high compared to previous years. Based on the current data and available information, the overall risk of measles at the national level is assessed as high for the following reasons:

Likely under-detection and under-reporting of measles cases due to non-availability of laboratory reagents for confirmation of cases. The number of suspect measles cases reported in the Early Warning Alert and Response System (EWARS) has continued to increase since week 1 in 2023. An increase in hospitalization of suspect measles cases is observed in some provinces, including Papua province.   
Low MCV1 and MCV2 coverage in most provinces, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic (2020-2021); 28% of the birth cohort in 2021 have not received any measles vaccination and are thus at high risk for measles infection. Also, 22% of the children have been only partially vaccinated.
Low measles-containing vaccine supplemental immunization activities (MCV-SIA) coverage in 2022, especially in high-risk provinces. There is vaccine hesitancy in the high-risk provinces, and limited capacity for outbreak response immunization (ORI), which is also impacted due to vaccine hesitancy. 
Low surveillance sensitivity in 2020-2021. As surveillance improved in 2022, more cases were reported from the subnational level. The overall surveillance sensitivity of measles and rubella i.e., the non-measles non rubella (NMNR) discard rate, was 3.33 per 100,000 population compared to the global standard of ≥2.0 per 100000 population. However, only 33% (170) districts achieved at least 2 NMNR discarded rate. In 2023, NMNR discard rate to date is at 0.46.
The B3 genotype detected in West Kalimantan and East Java is not originally endemic to Indonesia.
WHO advice
Measles is preventable by vaccination, which provides lifelong immunity in most recipients. In countries with low vaccination coverage, epidemics may occur every two to three years. However, their duration varies according to population size, crowding, and the population's immunity status.

The measles vaccine has been in use for nearly 60 years. It is safe, effective, and inexpensive. Vaccination is recommended for all susceptible children and adults for whom the vaccine is not contraindicated. National immunization programs must ensure the safe provision of immunization services that can reach all children with two doses of the measles vaccine. Routine measles vaccination for children and mass immunization campaigns in countries with high case and death rates are key public health strategies to reduce global measles deaths.

WHO recommends maintaining sustained homogeneous coverage of at least 95% with the first and second doses of the MCV vaccine and strengthening integrated epidemiological surveillance of measles and rubella to achieve timely detection of all suspected cases in public, private, and social security healthcare facilities. WHO continues to strengthen the global laboratory network to ensure timely diagnosis of measles and track the international spread of the measles viruses to allow a more coordinated country approach in targeting vaccination activities and reducing deaths from this vaccine-preventable disease.

It is critical to quickly recognize and treat measles complications to reduce the disease’s severity and mortality. Severe complications from measles can be reduced through supportive care that ensures good nutrition, adequate fluid intake, and treatment of dehydration with WHO-recommended oral rehydration solution. This solution replaces fluids and other essential elements lost through diarrhoea or vomiting. Antibiotics should be prescribed to treat eye and ear infections and pneumonia.

While there is no specific antiviral treatment for measles, prompt vitamin A in therapeutic doses is recommended to reduce complications and mortality among children infected with measles. Two doses of vitamin A oral supplements should be given 24 hours apart, irrespective of the timing of previous doses of vitamin A: 50 000 IU should be given to infants aged < 6 months, 100 000 IU to infants aged 6-11 months, and 200 000 IU to children aged 12-59 months. This treatment restores low vitamin A levels in acute measles cases that occur even in well-nourished children and can help prevent eye damage and blindness. Vitamin A supplements have also been shown to reduce the number of measles deaths.

WHO does not recommend any restrictions on travel or trade to or from Indonesia based on the information presented in this report.



Situation at a glance
Since the beginning of 2023, 557 confirmed cases of diphtheria have been detected in Nigeria, affecting 21 of the 36 states and the Federal Capital Territory. In December 2022, the Nigeria Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (NCDC) was notified of suspected diphtheria outbreaks in Kano and Lagos States. From 14 May 2022 to 9 April 2023, 1439 suspected cases have been reported, of which 557 (39%) have been confirmed, including 73 deaths among the confirmed cases (case fatality ratio of 13%). Nigeria has previously reported diphtheria outbreaks, with the most significant reported in 2011 affecting the rural areas of Borno State, in the northeast of the country. Diphtheria is a highly contagious vaccine-preventable disease which spreads between people mainly by direct contact or through the air via respiratory droplets. The disease can affect all age groups, however unimmunized children are particular at risk. It is potentially fatal. The disease can be treated by administering diphtheria antitoxin as well as antibiotics. Vaccination against diphtheria has reduced the mortality and morbidity of diphtheria dramatically.
Description of the situation
The Nigeria Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (NCDC) was notified of suspected diphtheria outbreaks in Kano and Lagos States on 1 December 2022. In January 2023, the number of confirmed cases increased, peaking at over 150 cases in week 4 of 2023 (ending 28 January); since then, a weekly decreasing trend has been observed. From 14 May 2022 to 9 April 2023, 1439, suspected diphtheria cases were reported from 21 states in Nigeria, with the majority (83%) of cases reported from Kano (1188), Yobe (97), Katsina (61), Lagos (25), Sokoto (14) and Zamfara (13). Of the 1439 suspected cases, 557 (39%) were confirmed (51 laboratory-confirmed, 504 clinically compatible and two epidemiologically linked), 483 (34%) were discarded, and 399 (28%) are pending classification. Laboratory-confirmed cases were reported from Kano (45), Lagos (3), Kaduna (1), Katsina (1), and Osun (1) states. Among the 557 confirmed cases, 73 deaths were recorded, for a CFR of 13%. The CFR has dropped significantly since the beginning of the outbreak due to, among other factors, increased access to diphtheria antitoxin (DAT).

Nigeria had recorded diphtheria outbreaks in the past. The most significant outbreak reported was between February and November 2011 in the rural areas of Borno State, north-eastern Nigeria, where 98 cases were reported. 

Figure 1: Epidemic curve of diphtheria cases by year/epi-week in Nigeria, epi-week 19 2022 – epi-week 14 2023



Figure 2: Distribution of Diphtheria cases by state in Nigeria from Epi week 19, 2022 to Epi week 14, 2023



Epidemiology
Diphtheria is a highly contagious vaccine-preventable disease caused by exotoxin-producing Corynebacterium diphtheriae It spreads between people mainly by direct contact or through the air via respiratory droplets. The disease can affect all age groups, however unimmunized children are particular at risk. It is potentially fatal.  Symptoms often come on gradually, beginning with a sore throat and fever. In severe cases, the bacteria produce a poison (toxin) that causes a thick grey or white patch at the back of throat. This can block the airways, making it hard to breathe or swallow, and also creates a barking cough. The neck may swell in part due to enlarged lymph nodes. Treatment involves administering diphtheria antitoxin as well as antibiotics. Vaccination against diphtheria has reduced the mortality and morbidity of diphtheria dramatically. Diphtheria is fatal in 5 - 10% of cases, with a higher mortality rate in young children. However, in settings with poor access to diphtheria antitoxin, the CFR can be as high as 40%. 
Public health response
Under the leadership of the Nigeria Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (NCDC), coordination and monitoring of diphtheria surveillance and response activities in the country are ongoing through the weekly diphtheria National Technical Working Group meetings.
Rapid Response Teams (RRTs) have been deployed to Katsina, Osun and Yobe States and re-deployed to Kano and Lagos States to support response activities.
Harmonization of surveillance and laboratory data across states and laboratories is ongoing.
Sensitization/training of clinical and surveillance officers has taken place in states where RRTs were deployed, on the presentation, prevention, and surveillance of diphtheria.
Cascaded trainings were conducted in their respective states by some of the laboratory scientists/physicians trained at the NCDC National Reference Laboratory (NRL), Abuja.
Procurement for reagents and sample collection and transportation materials/media processes has been initiated.
Drug sensitivity tests are ongoing at NCDC NRL on isolates sent in from states.
Distribution of DAT to the affected states has been ongoing since December 2022.
Strengthening of routine immunization activities across the country continues.
WHO risk assessment
Diphtheria cases are under-reported in Nigeria, with few reports of outbreaks in the past. The last outbreak was reported between February and November 2011 in the village of Kimba and its surrounding settlements in Borno State, north-eastern Nigeria, where 98 cases were reported. The diphtheria toxoid-containing vaccine third dose coverage in Nigeria is suboptimal. According to the 2021 Nigeria Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS) and National Immunization Coverage Survey (NICS), the third dose of pentavalent vaccine coverage was 57% in 2021.

The country is currently faced with several public health emergencies such as Lassa fever, cholera, mpox, meningitis and a humanitarian emergency in the northeast of the country. Due to insecurity, especially in north-eastern Nigeria, vaccination coverage remains suboptimal, especially in the areas controlled by non-state armed groups. Therefore, the outbreak of diphtheria further complicates and strains the already overstretched resources. The global supply of diphtheria antitoxin (DAT) is limited, and this may affect the availability of the required doses in a timely manner.

The overall risk of diphtheria in Nigeria was assessed as high at the national level, low at the regional level, and low at the global level.

WHO advice
Epidemiological surveillance ensuring early detection of diphtheria outbreaks should be in place in all countries, and all countries should have access to laboratory facilities that allow for the reliable identification of toxigenic C. diphtheriae. For the adequate medical management of cases, sufficient quantities of diphtheria antitoxin should be available nationally or regionally.

WHO recommends early reporting and management of suspected diphtheria cases to initiate timely treatment of cases and follow-up of contacts and ensure the supply of diphtheria antitoxin. Case management should be carried out following the WHO guideline and involve administering antitoxin to neutralize the toxin and antibiotics to kill the bacteria, reducing complication and mortality.  

As vaccination is key to preventing cases and outbreaks, high-risk populations such as children under five years of age, schoolchildren, close contact of diphtheria cases, and healthcare workers, should be vaccinated with diphtheria-containing vaccines on a priority basis. A coordinated response and community engagement can support control of the ongoing outbreak.

Although travellers do not have a special risk of diphtheria infection, it is recommended that national authorities remind travellers going to areas with diphtheria outbreaks to be appropriately vaccinated in accordance with their national vaccination scheme. A booster dose is recommended if more than five years have passed since the last dose.

WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions to Nigeria based on the information available for this event.




Situation at a glance
Between 1 October 2022 and 16 April 2023, Nigeria reported a total of 1686 suspected cases of meningitis, including 124 deaths, for a case fatality ratio (CFR) of 7%. Meningitis is a serious infection of the meninges, the membranes covering the brain and spinal cord. It is a devastating disease and a major public health challenge. Neisseria meningitidis (meningococcus), Streptococcus pneumoniae (pneumococcus), Haemophilus influenzae and Streptococcus agalactiae (group B streptococcus) are the main causative agents for meningitis. Vaccines can help prevent meningococcal disease.
Description of the situation

From 1 October 2022 to 16 April 2023, a total of 1686 suspected cases, 532 confirmed cases and 124 deaths (CFR: 7%) have been reported from 81 local government areas (LGAs) in 22 out of 36 administrative states, including the Federal Capital Territory (FCT), in Nigeria. 

Males account for 57% (n = 961) of total suspected cases. The highest proportion of reported cases is among children aged 1 to 15 years. Jigawa state accounts for 74% (n = 1252) of all suspected cases, and this state borders the Zinder region in Niger, where a meningitis outbreak has been reported since October 2022.

A total of 481 cerebrospinal fluid samples were collected from patients in 18 states. Out of these samples, 247 tested positive for bacterial infection by PCR test. Among the positive cases, 226 (91%) were caused by Neisseria meningitidis serogroup C (NmC), while 13 cases (5.4%) were caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae, and only one case (0.4%) by Haemophilus influenzae. For 232 samples the result was negative, and for two the result is pending. In the last five weeks alone (epidemiological weeks 11-15), 41 out of 140 samples tested (29%) were positive for NmC. The confirmed cases were reported from eight states including Jigawa (231), Zamfara (six), Yobe (five), Benue (one), Gombe (one), Katsina (one), Oyo (one), and Sokoto (one).

Fig. 1. Map indicating meningitis cases (n = 1686 suspected cases) between 1 October 2022 and 16 April 2023 



Source: Nigeria Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (NCDC)

Jigawa state consists of 27 LGAs, of which 25 have reported at least one suspected case. There have been 66 deaths in Jigawa state. During the current outbreak, Maigatari LGA and Sule-tankarkar LGA have both crossed the epidemic threshold of 10 suspected cases per 100 000 population and account for 60% of the total reported cases, with 505 and 247 cases respectively.

The CFR for this outbreak is 7% and 5% at the national and Jigawa state level, respectively.

Fig. 2. Weekly distribution of meningitis cases (n = 1686 suspected cases) between 1 October 2022 and 16 April 2023 



Epidemiology
Meningitis is a serious infection of the meninges, the membranes covering the brain and spinal cord. It is a devastating disease and remains a major public health challenge. The disease can be caused by many different pathogens including bacteria, fungi or viruses, but the highest global burden is seen with bacterial meningitis.

Several different bacteria can cause meningitis. Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Neisseria meningitidis are the most frequent ones. N. meningitidis, causing meningococcal meningitis, is the one with the potential to produce large epidemics.

Meningococcal meningitis is transmitted from person to person through droplets of respiratory and throat secretions, usually by asymptomatic carriers. Close, prolonged contact with an infected person, or living with a carrier, facilitates the spread of the disease. The average incubation period is four days but can range between two and 10 days.

The extended meningitis belt of sub-Saharan Africa, stretching from Senegal in the west to Ethiopia in the east (26 countries) and including the northern part of Nigeria, has the highest disease rates.  Meningitis in these countries follows a seasonal pattern, being most common during the dry season (December through June) with a peak between March and April, when there is persistent low air humidity and high dust loads that are believed to damage the pharyngeal mucosa and ease the colonization of the nasopharyngeal epithelium by the meningococci. Seasonal epidemics vary in size from year to year.

Response measures implemented during an outbreak, including improved case finding and management as well as mass vaccination campaigns, contribute to outbreak control.

Meningococcal meningitis remains a public health concern, in Nigeria, with outbreaks reported in recent years. With support from WHO, the Nigeria Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (NCDC) is implementing response measures at the national level. These include vaccination, surveillance, active case finding, sample testing, and case management. 

Public health response
With support from WHO, the Nigeria Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (NCDC) is implementing response measures at the national level. These include:

Daily coordination meetings being held at state and LGA levels since December 2022;
Surveillance activities with rapid response teams continuing to conduct active case search;
Case management activities at public health centres in affected LGAs;
Vaccination activities in 17 high-priority wards in the priority LGAs of Maigatari, Sule-tankarkar, Gumel and Gagarawa – all in Jigawa state.
WHO risk assessment
Nigeria has implemented interventions to combat meningitis, including introducing the meningococcal A (MenA) conjugate vaccine against NmA from 2011-2022. Through preventive campaigns, Nigeria has  vaccinated over 100 million people aged 1 to 29 years, and the vaccine has been included in the country’s routine immunization schedule since 2019. Among MenA vaccinated populations in countries of the meningitis belt, the incidence of serogroup A meningitis has declined by more than 99%, and no serogroup A case has been confirmed since 2017. However, there are still annual reports of meningitis cases in the country that are associated mostly with meningococcus serogroup C (NmC).

Insecurity, particularly in Northeast Nigeria, affects vaccination coverage, especially in areas controlled by non-state armed groups. At the national level, immunization coverage remains suboptimal at 50% as of 2021.

Licensed vaccines against meningococcal, pneumococcal and Haemophilus influenzae diseases have been available for many years. These bacteria have several different strains (known as serotypes or serogroups), and vaccines are designed to protect against the most harmful strains. Over time, there have been major improvements in strain coverage and vaccine availability, but no universal vaccine against these infections exists.

Additionally, in November 2022, an outbreak of meningitis was confirmed in the Zinder region of Niger. This region borders Jigawa, which is the worst-affected state in Nigeria. The risk of cross-border transmission is high due to the population movement across the border.

Based on the above information, the overall risk of meningitis in Nigeria is assessed as high at the national level, moderate at the regional level, and low at the global level.

WHO advice
Preventing meningitis through vaccination is the most effective way to reduce the burden and impact of the disease by delivering long-lasting protection. The anticipated rollout of multivalent meningococcal conjugate vaccines is a public health priority to eliminate bacterial meningitis epidemics in the African meningitis belt.

Early diagnosis and treatment are critical in managing all types of meningococcal disease. Appropriate case management, active community-based case-finding, and reactive mass vaccination of affected populations are necessary in response to epidemics. Currently, there is an ongoing reactive vaccination campaign. To guide further response activities, it is crucial to monitor the spread of the disease to new areas, including considering further vaccine requests if appropriate. Timeliness of the reactive campaign is essential, with the goal being to initiate it within four weeks of crossing the epidemic threshold.

WHO does not recommend any restriction on travel and trade to Nigeria based on the currently available information. 





Situation at a glance
This Disease Outbreak News is an update on the report published on 6 April 2023 concerning human infection caused by avian influenza A(H5N1) in Chile. Since then, WHO received information on the results of genomic sequencing and the ongoing public health response. On 5 April, the results of genomic sequencing were completed by the Institute of Public Health of Chile (ISP per its acronym in Spanish), which is the National Influenza Centre (NIC) in Chile, which identified avian influenza virus A(H5N1) phylogenetic clade 2.3.4.4b. The genomic sequencing had 99.9% identity with H5 hemagglutinin sequences from Chilean birds, and complete neuraminidase (NA) had 100% identity with N1 sequences from Chilean birds. A total of 12 contacts (close contacts and healthcare workers) were identified. All tested negative for influenza and have completed the monitoring period. No further cases in Chile have been identified so far. Avian influenza infection in a human can cause severe disease and is notifiable under the International Health Regulations (IHR, 2005) [1].
Description of the situation

As reported previously, on 29 March 2023, the Ministry of Health of Chile notified WHO of the detection of human infection with avian influenza A(H5) virus.

On 7 April 2023, the Chile International Health Regulations National Focal Point reported the results of genomic sequencing completed on 5 April 2023 by the NIC, which identified avian influenza A(H5N1) phylogenetic clade 2.3.4.4b.

The patient is a 53-year-old male from the Region of Antofagasta in the north of Chile. He had no history of comorbidities or recent travel.

On 13 March 2023, the patient developed symptoms including cough, sore throat, and hoarseness. On 21 March, due to worsening symptoms, he sought care at a local hospital. On 22 March 2023, the patient developed dyspnea and was admitted to a Regional Hospital at Antofagasta (SARI Sentinel Site). A nasopharyngeal swab sample was collected as part of routine severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) surveillance and tested negative for SARS-CoV-2 by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). On 23 March, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit and treatment with antivirals (oseltamivir) and antibiotics was initiated. The patient remains in respiratory isolation under multidisciplinary management, with mechanical ventilation due to pneumonia. Standard infection control precautions were kept since the detection of the case.

On 27 March, a bronchoalveolar sample was collected and tested positive for an unsubtypeable influenza A virus by PCR. The sample was sent to the ISP and tested positive for avian influenza A(H5) on 29 March. On 31 March, the NIC forwarded the patient's samples to a WHO Collaborating Centre for further characterization. 

On 5 April, the results of genomic sequencing were completed by the NIC in Chile, which identified avian influenza virus A(H5N1) phylogenetic clade 2.3.4.4b. The genomic sequencing had 99.9% identity with H5 hemagglutinin sequences from Chilean birds, and complete neuraminidase (NA) had 100% identity with N1 sequences from Chilean birds. 

Three close contacts of the case were identified, all asymptomatic, tested negative for influenza and have concluded the monitoring period. Additionally, a total of nine contacts among healthcare workers were identified, all tested negative for influenza and concluded the monitoring period on 4 April. However, on 5 April one of them developed respiratory symptoms, therefore a nasopharyngeal swab was taken, which tested negative for influenza; the monitoring period for this contact was extended for seven additional days, ending on 11 April.

Avian influenza A (H5N1) was first detected in the Region of the Americas in birds in December 2014. Between December 2022 and February 2023, highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) has been detected in wild aquatic birds (pelicans and penguins) and sea mammals (sea lions) in the Antofagasta Region where the case resides. According to preliminary findings of the epidemiological investigation of this human case, the most plausible route of transmission was through environmental exposure, given the large number of dead sea mammals and wild birds found in the area close to the patient´s residence.

Epidemiology
Zoonotic influenza infections in humans may range from asymptomatic or mild upper respiratory infection (fever and cough) to rapid progression to severe pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome, shock, and death, depending on factors related to the virus and the host. Rarely, gastrointestinal, or neurological symptoms have been reported. Human cases of avian influenza are usually the result of direct or indirect exposure to infected live or dead poultry or contaminated environments.

In the Region of the Americas during 2022 and 2023, an increasing number of outbreaks of highly pathogenic avian influenza A(H5) have been reported in backyard poultry, farm poultry, wild birds, and wild mammals. Since the first confirmation of avian influenza A(H5N1) in the region in 2014, three human infections caused by avian influenza A(H5) have been reported: the first in the United States of America, reported in April 2022; the second in Ecuador, reported in January 2023; and this case. Globally, since 2003, 873 human infections with A(H5N1) viruses, including 458 deaths (CFR 52%), have been reported to WHO.

Public health response
Additional public health activities have been reported since the last update. Intersectoral activities have been carried out by the Ministry of Health of Chile, the Agricultural and Livestock Service (SAG) and the National Fisheries and Aquaculture Service of Chile (SERNAPESCA), of the Ministry of Agriculture of Chile, among others, in order to follow up on the avian influenza outbreaks in Antofagasta Region and outbreaks in other Regions.
Active monitoring of persons with respiratory symptoms and exposure to wild birds, poultry, and sea mammals has been undertaken.
Seasonal influenza vaccination is being conducted in risk groups according to the guidelines of the National Immunization Program. 
Regarding risk communication, the population has been informed about this case and prevention measures through messaging for different target audiences.
The Ministry of Health of Chile is participating actively in the Disaster Risk Management Committee of the National Service for Disaster Prevention and Response (SENAPRED) to deal with the animal health emergency.
WHO risk assessment
WHO’s risk assessment remains unchanged since the last update.

According to the preliminary findings of the local epidemiological investigation, the most plausible hypothesis about transmission is that it occurred through environmental exposure to areas where either sick or dead birds or sea mammals were found close to the residence of the case. According to the information received thus far, the virus has not been detected in other individuals.

Whenever avian influenza viruses are circulating in poultry, wild birds or mammals, there is a risk for sporadic infection and small clusters of human cases due to exposure to infected animals or contaminated environments.

Public health measures have been implemented by both the human and animal health agencies, including monitoring healthcare workers and other contacts of the laboratory-confirmed case. Currently available epidemiological and virological evidence suggests that A(H5) viruses, including H5N1, have not acquired the capacity for sustained transmission among humans, thus the likelihood of human-to-human spread is low. Based on available information, WHO assesses the risk to the general population posed by this virus to be low.

Should infected individuals from affected areas travel internationally, their infection may be detected in another country during travel or after arrival. If this were to occur, further community-level spread is considered unlikely as this virus has not acquired the ability to transmit easily among humans.

The preliminary risk assessment will be reviewed as needed should further epidemiological or virological information become available.

WHO advice
Due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, and the large outbreaks among animal populations, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect and monitor virological, epidemiological, and clinical changes associated with emerging or circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal) health, and of timely virus sharing for risk assessment. The diversity of zoonotic influenza viruses that have caused human infections is alarming and necessitates strengthened surveillance in both animal and human populations, thorough investigation of every zoonotic infection, and pandemic preparedness planning. Vaccination of poultry workers with seasonal influenza vaccine has been advised to prevent a viral mutation that could facilitate human-to-human transmission.

WHO does not advise special traveler screening at points of entry.  In the case of a confirmed or suspected human infection with a novel influenza virus with pandemic potential, including avian influenza and variant viruses, contact tracing should be initiated and a thorough epidemiologic investigation of history of exposure to animals and of travel should be conducted. The epidemiologic investigation should include early identification of unusual clusters of respiratory disease that could signal person-to-person transmission of the novel virus, and clinical samples collected from the time and place that the case occurred should be tested and then sent to a WHO Collaborating Centre for further characterization.

There are no approved vaccines for preventing influenza A(H5) in humans. Candidate vaccine viruses to prevent influenza A(H5) infection in humans have been developed for pandemic preparedness purposes. Given the observed extent and frequency of avian influenza cases in wild birds and some wild mammals, the public should avoid contact with animals that are sick or dead from unknown causes and should report the occurrence to the authorities.

Travelers to countries with known outbreaks of animal influenza should avoid farms, contact with animals in live animal markets, entering areas where animals may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with animal faeces or other body fluids. Travelers should also wash their hands often with soap and water and follow good food safety and food hygiene practices.

Close analysis of the epidemiological situation, further characterization of the most recent viruses found in humans and animals, and serological investigations, are critical to assess risk and to adjust risk management measures in a timely manner.

All human infections caused by a novel influenza subtype are notifiable under the International Health Regulations (IHR 2005), and States Parties to the IHR are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a human infection caused by an influenza A virus with the potential to cause a pandemic. Evidence of illness is not required for this notification.



Situation at a glance
On 17 March 2023, the Burundi Ministry of Health declared a national public health emergency after reporting the detection of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 from one case of acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) and five environmental samples. Local public health authorities are conducting a field investigation and an active search for additional AFP cases; a reactive immunization campaign is also planned.
Description of the situation

On 17 March 2023, the Burundi Ministry of Health declared a national public health emergency following the confirmation of a case of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) in the country. The virus was isolated from a four-year-old, zero-dose male child with acute flaccid paralysis (AFP), from Bujumbura Rural province and from five cVDPV2-positive environmental samples from Bujumbura Mairie province, collected in November and December 2022. The case had the onset of paralysis on 24 November 2022. A stool specimen was collected on 27 November 2022 and was confirmed to be cVDPV2 on 13 March 2023. Sequencing results showed that the isolate has undergone eight to ten nucleotide changes.  All the isolated viruses above are linked to a new emergence of cVDPV2, in Sud-Kivu, Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) [1].

According to the WHO UNICEF estimates of national immunization coverage, the coverage for both the oral poliovirus vaccine third dose (OPV3) and inactivated poliovirus vaccine first dose (IPV1) was 94% in 2021 in Burundi. However, the coverage of OPV3 and IPV1 was 63.4% and 56.6% respectively in the Health Centre of Gatumba where the index case is reported, according to the area coverage survey conducted during the case investigation. 

These are the first instances of cVDPV2 linked with novel oral polio vaccine type 2 (nOPV2) since the roll-out of the vaccine began in March 2021. Nevertheless, all available clinical and field evidence continues to demonstrate that nOPV2 is safe and effective and has a significantly lower risk of reverting to a form that causes paralysis in low immunity settings when compared to monovalent oral polio vaccine type 2 (mOPV2). To date, close to 600 million doses of nOPV2 have been administered across 28 countries globally, and the majority of countries have seen no further transmission of cVDPV2 after two immunization rounds [1]. 

Epidemiology
Polio is a highly infectious disease that largely affects children under five years of age, causing permanent paralysis (approximately 1 in 200 infections) or death (2-10% of those paralyzed).

The virus is transmitted from person-to-person, mainly through the fecal-oral route or, less frequently, by a common vehicle (e.g., contaminated water or food) and multiplies in the intestine, from where it can invade the nervous system and cause paralysis. The incubation period is usually 7-10 days but can range from 4-35 days. Up to 90% of those infected are either asymptomatic or experience mild symptoms and the disease usually goes unrecognized.

Vaccine-derived poliovirus is a well-documented strain of poliovirus mutated from the strain originally contained in OPV. OPV contains a live, weakened form of poliovirus that replicates in the intestine for a limited period, thereby developing immunity by building up antibodies. On rare occasions, when replicating in the gastrointestinal tract, OPV strains genetically change and may spread in communities that are not fully vaccinated against polio, especially in areas where there is poor hygiene, poor sanitation, or overcrowding. The lower the population's immunity, the longer this virus survives and the more genetic changes it undergoes.

In very rare instances, the vaccine-derived virus can genetically change into a form that can cause paralysis as does the wild poliovirus – this is what is known as a vaccine-derived poliovirus (VDPV). The detection of VDPV in at least two different sources and at least two months apart, that are genetically linked, showing evidence of transmission in the community, is classified as ‘circulating’ vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2). 

Public health response
An initial risk assessment (multi-country and regional), and field investigation both for the AFP case and the positive environmental samples have been completed by local and national public health authorities with support from partners of the Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI), and a multi-country response plan has been developed. Burundi and DRC have scheduled initial vaccination campaigns to be conducted in May, and based on the ongoing risk assessment, supplementary immunization activities/vaccination campaigns will be conducted with the first round scheduled for 4-7 May and expected to be followed by two subsequent rounds in June and July 2023 targeting children under 7 years of age in Burundi. The vaccination campaign will be conducted in a synchronized way with bordering/neighbouring countries.

Additionally, surveillance for both AFP and environmental is being enhanced in the areas of detection, and the operationalization of further environmental surveillance sites is being evaluated, including bordering locations. Samples from Burundi, DRC, and neighbouring countries are also being prioritized for testing by the Global Polio Laboratory Network.

WHO risk assessment
The primary risk associated with any new cVDPV2 is gaps in routine immunization. The risk of further spread of such strains, or the emergence of new strains, is magnified by decreased immunization rates related to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. This event further highlights the risk of the international spread of cVDPV2 to neighbouring countries. There is no evidence that this virus poses a greater risk of spread, including international spread, than other VDPV2s that are derived from Sabin vaccines. 

WHO advice
It is important that all countries, in particular those with frequent travel and contacts with polio-affected countries and areas, strengthen surveillance for AFP cases and commence planned expansion of environmental surveillance in order to rapidly detect any new virus importation and to facilitate a rapid response. Countries, territories and areas should also maintain uniformly high routine immunization coverage at the district level to minimize the consequences of any new virus introduction.

WHO’s International travel and health recommends that all travellers to polio-affected areas be fully vaccinated against polio. Residents (and visitors for more than four weeks) from infected areas should receive an additional dose of OPV or IPV within four weeks to 12 months of travel. 

As per the advice of an Emergency Committee convened under the International Health Regulations (2005), the international spread of poliovirus remains a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC). Countries affected by poliovirus transmission are subject to Temporary Recommendations. To comply with the Temporary Recommendations issued under the PHEIC, any country infected by poliovirus should declare the outbreak as a national public health emergency; ensure the vaccination of residents and long-term visitors; and restrict, at the point of departure, the travel of individuals who have not been vaccinated or cannot prove the vaccination status.

The latest epidemiological information on cVDPVs is updated on a weekly basis. 

WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions to Burundi based on the current information available for this event.




Situation at a glance
On 17 March 2023, the Indonesia Ministry of Health notified WHO of the detection of a circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) in a 48-month-old female with acute flaccid paralysis (AFP), from Purwakarta district in West Java province. Field investigations were immediately launched by local and national public health authorities, with support from partners of the Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI). Two rounds of immunization with novel OPV2 have been planned to cover children below five years of age, regardless of their prior vaccination status. The first round was implemented in April 2023.
Description of the situation

On 17 March 2023, the Indonesia Ministry of Health notified WHO of the detection of a circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) in a 48-month-old female with acute flaccid paralysis (AFP), from Purwakarta district in West Java province. The case had the onset of paralysis on 16 February 2023. The girl had not received any previous doses of oral poliovirus vaccine (OPV) or inactivated poliovirus vaccine (IPV). A stool specimen was collected on 21 February 2023 and was confirmed to be cVDPV2 on 14 March 2023. Genetic sequencing results showed that the isolate has undergone 30 to 31 nucleotide changes from vaccine strains. The results of whole genome sequencing are pending. The patient and her parents had no travel history within the month before the onset of AFP; however, during this period, the household had received visitors including relatives from another village. 

A total of four confirmed cases of VDPV2 have been reported in Indonesia since November 2022. This includes three cases of circulating VDPV2 (cVDPV2) with acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) in Aceh province and one in West Java province. Additionally, four healthy children in Aceh province were confirmed to have cVDPV2 on 25 November 2022. The poliovirus was identified as being from the same emergence group as the cases reported in Aceh in 2022 and hence classified as cVDPV2 but is divergent from the Aceh viruses, signifying potentially missed transmission. A rapid risk assessment was conducted for the outbreak in Aceh in November 2022, which assessed the risk at the national level as high, regional level as moderate and global level as low.  

The administrative coverage of the bivalent oral polio vaccine (bOPV4) between 2018 and 2022 in West Java ranged from 88% to 102%, while coverage of inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) ranged from 26% to 106%. Vaccination coverage rates for bOPV and IPV were also above 90% in a catch-up campaign in West Java. Coverage with bOPV in the Purwakarta district has been consistently high between 2018 and 2022, ranging from 94% in 2020 to 104% in 2021; however, coverage with IPV decreased to 26% in 2020 before increasing to 80% in 2021, and reaching 100% in 2022.  

However, a pocket of unvaccinated children (for either bOPV and IPV) remains in West Java, which is mainly related to a lack of understanding of the importance of immunization by parents, concerns about the safety of the vaccines (including fever following immunization, receiving multiple injections and as a result of other sources of misinformation) and religious beliefs.

Epidemiology
Polio is a highly infectious disease that largely affects children under five years of age, causing permanent paralysis (approximately 1 in 200 infections) or death (2-10% of those paralyzed).

The virus is transmitted person-to-person, mainly through the fecal-oral route or, less frequently, by a common vehicle (e.g., contaminated water or food) and multiplies in the intestine, from where it can invade the nervous system and cause paralysis. The incubation period is usually 7–10 days but can range from 4–35 days. Up to 90% of those infected are either asymptomatic or experience mild symptoms and the disease usually goes unrecognized.

Vaccine-derived poliovirus is a well-documented strain of poliovirus mutated from the strain originally contained in OPV. OPV contains a live, weakened form of poliovirus that replicates in the intestine for a limited period, thereby developing immunity by building up antibodies. On rare occasions, when replicating in the gastrointestinal tract, OPV strains genetically change and may spread in communities that are not fully vaccinated against polio, especially in areas where there is poor hygiene, poor sanitation, or overcrowding. The lower the population's immunity, the longer this virus survives and the more genetic changes it undergoes.

In very rare instances, the vaccine-derived virus can genetically change into a form that can cause paralysis as does the wild poliovirus – this is what is known as a vaccine-derived poliovirus (VDPV). The detection of VDPV in at least two different sources and at least two months apart, that are genetically linked, showing evidence of transmission in the community, should be classified as ‘circulating’ vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2). 

Public health response
Following confirmation of the case in West Java, field investigations have been completed by the Ministry of Health, with support from WHO, UNICEF, and other partners, including an active search for AFP cases targeting at least 200 households and a review of hospital records.
Faecal samples have been collected from 30 healthy children, of which six samples were identified as VDPV2, which confirms that the virus was already circulating.
Two rounds of immunization with novel OPV2 have been planned to vaccinate a total of 3 984 797 children between 0 to 59 months in all 27 districts in West Java. The first round started on 3 April 2023. A cumulative coverage of 85.6% has been achieved in West Java in the first round as of 11 April 2023. The second round is planned for the third week of May.
Following the outbreak in Aceh on 25 November 2022, two rounds of supplementary immunization activities (SIAs) with nOPV2 were held in Aceh province for children aged 12 years and younger, starting on 28 November 2022. The cumulative coverage of 96% was achieved in the first and second rounds.
SIAs with nOPV2 in Aceh neighboring North Sumatra province started on 13 February 2023 and are ongoing. Currently, coverage with the first round among those aged 0-59 months is 93%. The total target population for the two provinces combined is 2 564 594. This number has met the minimum number target to be covered during SIAs for cVDPV2 outbreak control, as recommended by WHO.
WHO risk assessment
WHO assesses the risk to be high at the national level. Despite Indonesia having a strong capacity to respond to poliovirus outbreaks and West Java having a moderate to strong outbreak response capacity to interrupt transmission, there is a high susceptibility of the population to poliovirus type 2 after switching from trivalent to bivalent OPV; sub-optimal IPV coverage in Aceh, West Java and several other provinces in Indonesia; high population mobility between West Java and other provinces within Indonesia; and reluctance to vaccinate among at-risk populations. The outbreak in Indonesia poses a moderate regional risk and a low risk globally.

The detection of cVDPVs highlights the importance of maintaining high levels of routine vaccination coverage everywhere to minimize the risk and consequences of the circulation of any poliovirus, as well as the need to ensure quality surveillance for early detection of any poliovirus.

WHO advice
It is important that all countries, in particular those with frequent travel and contacts with polio-affected countries and areas, strengthen surveillance for AFP cases and commence planned expansion of environmental surveillance in order to rapidly detect any new virus importation and to facilitate a rapid response. Countries, territories and areas should also maintain uniformly high routine immunization coverage at the district level to minimize the consequences of any new virus introduction.

WHO’s International travel and health recommends that all travellers to polio-affected areas be fully vaccinated against polio.

As per the advice of an Emergency Committee convened under the International Health Regulations (2005), the international spread of poliovirus remains a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC). Countries affected by poliovirus transmission are subject to Temporary Recommendations. To comply with the Temporary Recommendations issued under the PHEIC, any country infected by poliovirus should i) declare the outbreak as a national public health emergency; ii) encourage residents and long-term visitors to receive a dose of IPV four weeks to 12 months prior to international iii) encourage residents and long-term visitors to receive a dose of IPV four weeks to 12 months prior to international travel iv) further intensify efforts to increase IPV immunization coverage, including sharing coverage data, and v) further intensify efforts to increase IPV immunization coverage, including sharing coverage data.

The latest epidemiological information on cVDPVs is updated on a weekly basis.  

WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions to Indonesia based on the current information available for this event.



Situation at a glance
This Disease Outbreak News was amended on 17 April 2023 to include information on partner coordination as part of the ongoing response measures. Since the last Disease Outbreak News on this event was published on 22 March 2023 (with data as of 21 March 2023), six additional laboratory-confirmed cases of Marburg virus disease (MVD) have been reported in Equatorial Guinea. This brings the total to 15 laboratory-confirmed and 23 probable cases since the declaration of the outbreak on 13 February 2023. Among the laboratory confirmed there are 11 deaths (Case Fatality Ratio 78.6%; for one confirmed case the outcome is unknown), and all probable cases are dead. The most affected district is Bata in Litoral province, with nine laboratory-confirmed MVD cases reported. WHO is supporting the Ministry of Health by strengthening different response pillars, including but not limited to surveillance, including at points of entry; laboratory; case management; infection prevention and control; risk communication and community engagement. MVD is a disease with high mortality that causes haemorrhagic fever, and is among the diseases that require assessment under the International Health Regulations. On 30 March 2023, WHO assessed the public health risk posed by this outbreak as very high at the national level, high at sub-regional level, moderate at the regional level and low at the global level. WHO advises against restrictions to international travel and/or trade in Equatorial Guinea.
Description of the situation
On 13 February 2023, the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare of Equatorial Guinea declared an outbreak of Marburg virus disease (MVD) after suspected viral hemorrhagic fever deaths were reported between 7 January and 7 February 2023, and a case tested positive on 12 February for Marburg virus by real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) at the Institute Pasteur in Dakar, Senegal.

Since the last Disease Outbreak News on this event (22 March 2023) and as of 11 April 2023, six additional laboratory-confirmed cases of MVD were reported in Equatorial Guinea, bringing the total of cases in the outbreak to 15 laboratory-confirmed. Additionally, 23 probable cases have been reported since the start of the outbreak. Eleven deaths were recorded among laboratory-confirmed cases (Case Fatality Ratio (CFR) among confirmed cases 78.6%), and all probable cases are dead; for one confirmed case the outcome is unknown. Four laboratory-confirmed cases (26.6%) were reported among healthcare workers, of whom two died. Among the confirmed cases, three have recovered.

Figure 1. MVD cases by week of onset* and case classification, Equatorial Guinea, as of 11 April 2023. 

Among MVD laboratory-confirmed cases with age and sex information (n = 13), the majority occurred among females (9/14; 64.3%), while the most affected age group is 40-49 years (6/14; 42.8%), followed by the age groups 10-19 and 30-39 (three cases each).

Five districts (Bata, Ebebiyin, Evinayong, Nsok Nsomo and Nsork) in four provinces (Centro Sur, Kie Ntem, Litoral and Wele-Nzas) have been affected by the outbreak (Figure  2), with Bata district reporting the majority of confirmed cases (n = 9) and deaths (n = 6), and Ebebiyin district, where the outbreak was first detected, reporting the majority of probable cases,(n = 11) (Table 1).

In the last 21 days (from 22 March 2023 to 11 April 2023), five confirmed cases were reported from Bata (n = 4) and Nsork (n = 1) districts (Figure 3). Among the four cases reported from Bata district, three cases have an epidemiological link either through a family cluster or through health care setting. The fourth and most recent case was reported on 7 April; an investigation of this case is ongoing to establish transmission chains and ensure appropriate identification of all contacts.

Since the last Disease Outbreak News on this event, one new district, Nsork in Wele-Nzas province, has been affected by the outbreak, reporting one confirmed case, linked to a known case from another district that previously reported confirmed cases.

Since the start of the outbreak and as of 10 April 2023, a total of 1322 contacts have been listed, with an average follow-up rate around 80-90%.

Table 1. Number of MVD cases and deaths, by district and case classification, Equatorial Guinea, as of 11 April 2023. 

Figure 2. Map of districts reporting MVD confirmed and probable cases as of 11 April, Equatorial Guinea. 

Figure 3. Map of districts reporting MVD confirmed cases in the last 21 days (from 21 March 2023 to 11 April 2023), Equatorial Guinea. 

Epidemiology
Marburg virus spreads between people via direct contact through broken skin or mucous membranes with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected people, and with surfaces and materials such as bedding, clothing contaminated with these fluids. Healthcare workers have previously been infected while treating patients with suspected or confirmed MVD. Burial ceremonies that involve direct contact with the body of the deceased can also contribute to the transmission of Marburg virus. The incubation period varies from two to 21 days. Illness caused by Marburg virus begins abruptly, with high fever, severe headache, and severe malaise. Severe haemorrhagic manifestations may appear between five and seven days from symptom onset, although not all cases have haemorrhagic signs,  and fatal cases usually have some form of bleeding, often from multiple areas. Although no vaccines or antiviral treatments are approved to treat the virus, Remdesivir is being used on compassionate care bases. Supportive care – rehydration with oral or intravenous fluids – and treatment of specific symptoms improve survival. A range of potential treatments are being evaluated, including blood products, immune therapies, and drug therapies. This is the first time that Equatorial Guinea has reported an outbreak of MVD. Another MVD outbreak is currently taking place in Tanzania with a total of eight confirmed cases and five deaths as of 4 April 2023. Other MVD outbreaks have been previously reported in Ghana (2022), Guinea (2021), Uganda (2017, 2014, 2012, 2007), Angola (2004-2005), the Democratic Republic of the Congo (1998 and 2000), Kenya (1990, 1987, 1980) and South Africa (1975).
Public health response
Coordination

The Government has activated a regional public health emergency operation center (PHEOC) in Bata under the leadership of the Minister of Health and the Minister Delegate.
A national operational response plan has been developed by the MoH.
Regular meetings are held by the MoH to coordinate response activities at national, regional and district level.
Partners from the Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN) have been mobilized to assist response activities. In collaboration with Incident Management team GOARN issued Request for assistance on 30 March. Several experts are deployed and in process of being deployed to support case management, infection prevention and control, laboratory, and epidemiology and surveillance functions in the field.
Surveillance

WHO supported the Ministry of Health in setting up an alert and dispatch center for MVD alert management across the region.
WHO is supporting the Ministry of Health in training for surveillance activities, including case investigation, contact tracing, active case search in health facilities and the community, and in supervising field teams.
WHO is supporting the Ministry of Health in epidemiological data collection and management system, and developed and disseminated a reviewed case definition, validated by the Ministry of Health.
Laboratory

With the support of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and WHO, a laboratory with RT-PCR capacities has been set up in Bata for MVD diagnostic.  
WHO is supporting the implementation of a specimen transportation system, and discussions are on-going to support the establishment of sequencing capacities in the country.
Additional national staff are being trained on Marburg virus diagnostics by the WHO.
 Clinical care

WHO supported the Ministry of Health in the establishment an operational treatment and isolation centre in Bata, and is planning to open additional treatment facilities in other districts.
Assessments visits were carried out at identified treatment and isolation centers to identify and address gaps.
WHO is supporting awareness campaigns of clinical staff to help surveillance and reporting.
Infection Prevention and Control (IPC)

An IPC task force has been initiated, and a national IPC strategy is currently in draft form.
An IPC Scorecard for assessment of health facility IPC practices for readiness and response to Marburg has been implemented.
Trainings for health workers on IPC are in progress, including decontamination and safe and dignified burial teams (SBD).
Safe and dignified burials teams have been established in Bata and Ebibeyin.
Risk Communication and Community Engagement (RCCE)

WHO is coordinating with other key partners for joint support on RCCE activities (UNICEF, IFRC among others).
WHO is supporting public awareness and capacity building for RCCE national experts, social mobilisers and community leaders (such as Civil Society Organizations, religious leaders, and women groups).
The recruitment of national RCCE consultants and deployment of an international expert have been conducted.
An RCCE national plan is under development and a rapid social behavioural survey is being prepared for implementation.
The Message Bank for Marburg has been developed and disseminated. The message bank is available in Spanish and English, with ongoing translation in Swahili, French and Portuguese.
A list of frequently asked questions and answers on Marburg virus disease, which will be accessible to the public, is under development.
WHO is providing technical support to the development of tools and education and communication (IEC) materials for preparedness in Gabon and Cameroon.
 Border health and points of entry

A needs and capacity assessment has been conducted to strengthen response capacities at points of entry through, for example, the development of contingency plans and standard operating procedures, the training of point-of-entry staff on the identification of signs and symptoms of MVD and the management of potential cases, implementation of risk communication and community engagement activities and the provision of handwashing and transportation capabilities.
WHO is working with the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the International Organization for Migration (IOM) on an upcoming webinar to raise awareness on the necessary border health readiness and response activities in the context of MVD outbreaks for affected and neighboring countries.
 Operational support and logistics (OSL)

​WHO has established support for fleet management including two ambulances on standby 24/7 at the Bata treatment centr​e, and over 20 vehicles. WHO has provided essential medicines and supplies.
 Readiness and preparedness in neighboring countries

WHO has conducted a second readiness assessment across all pillars for the two surrounding countries, Cameroon and Gabon, and based on their gaps, activities to address them will be recommended including the deployment of experts to support the implementation of some of the readiness activities.
The WHO is working with Cameroon, Equatorial Guinea and Gabon to coordinate a high-level cross-border meeting.
WHO risk assessment
Equatorial Guinea is facing an outbreak of MVD for the first time and the country's capacity to manage the outbreak needs to be strengthened. In addition to the nine confirmed cases reported in the Disease Outbreak News of 22 March, six more individuals have tested positive for MVD, with an additional affected province. While many cases are linked within a social network or by geographic proximity, the presence of cases and/or clusters across multiple districts without clear epidemiologic links may indicate undetected transmission of the virus. The presence of confirmed cases in Bata increases the risk of disease spread, as it is the most populated city and economic hub of Equatorial Guinea, with an international airport and port. Bata has also reported the highest number of confirmed cases and confirmed deaths. The last case was also reported from Bata and investigation is ongoing to establish transmission chains. The country surveillance system remains suboptimal with few alerts reported and investigated. Several epidemiological links and transmission chains have not been detected, thus there might be contacts not identified.

Implemented infection prevention and control measures are insufficient as demonstrated by MVD cases reported among healthcare workers. The diagnostic capacity for Marburg virus in the country is limited in terms of the number of samples that can be analyzed per day (a maximum of around 50 a day). The community's perception of risk is estimated to be very low. There are frequent population movements between the different districts of the mainland region, as well as with the island region, despite the quarantine measures implemented in several of the affected areas. Frequent population movements and very porous land borders are also reported in the districts bordering Cameroon and Gabon, with surveillance at land entry points being suboptimal, and countless uncontrolled paths or trails along the border with Cameroon and Gabon. Also, surveillance at the entry points of the international Bata airport or international seaport, is not optimal. 

Considering the above-described situation, on 30 March 2023, WHO assessed the risk posed by this outbreak as very high at the national level, high at sub-regional level, moderate at the regional level and low at the global level.

WHO advice
Marburg virus disease outbreak control relies on using a range of interventions, such as prompt isolation and case management; surveillance including active case search, case investigation and contact tracing; an optimal laboratory service; infection prevention and control, including prompt safe and dignified burial; and social mobilization. Community engagement is key to successfully controlling Marburg disease outbreaks. Raising awareness of risk factors for infection with Marburg virus and the protective measures that individuals can take is an effective way to reduce human transmission. Health and care workers caring for patients with confirmed or suspected MVD should apply IPC measures including standard and transmission-based precautions to avoid contact with the patient’s blood and body fluids and with contaminated surfaces and objects. Health facilities should ensure environmental controls, such as adequate water, sanitation and hygiene, as well as that safe infectious waste management protocols are in place to enable health workers to practice IPC measures. WHO recommends that male survivors of MVD practice safer sex for 12 months from onset of symptoms, or until their semen twice tests negative for the Marburg virus. Contact with body fluids should be avoided and washing with soap and water is recommended. WHO does not recommend isolation of male or female convalescent patients whose blood has tested negative for the Marburg virus.

Based on the available information and current risk assessment, WHO advises to strengthen surveillance at points of entry in the affected areas in Equatorial Guinea for the identification of cases, including through exit screening; to map cross-border population mobility to identify populations in vulnerable situations and target public health interventions; and to provide public health information and advice in all relevant languages at points of entry and in adjacent communities near land borders. In addition, suspect, probable and confirmed cases and their contacts should not undertake travel, including international.

WHO advises against any other international travel and/or trade measures in Equatorial Guinea.

States Parties adopting international travel- and trade-related measures potentially more restrictive than those advised by WHO, are invited to report them to WHO, pursuant to Article 43 of the International Health Regulations (2005).




Situation at a glance
On 27 March 2023, the National Health Commission of the People’s Republic of China notified WHO of one confirmed case of human infection with an avian influenza A(H3N8) virus. This is the third reported case of human infection with an avian influenza A(H3N8) virus; all three cases have been reported from China. Epidemiological investigation and close contact tracing have been carried out. There have been no other cases found among close contacts of the infected individual. Based on available information, it appears that this virus does not have the ability to spread easily from person to person, and therefore the risk of it spreading among humans at the national, regional, and international levels is considered to be low. However, due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO stresses the importance of global surveillance to detect virological, epidemiological and clinical changes associated with circulating influenza viruses which may affect human (or animal) health.
Description of the situation
On 27 March 2023, the National Health Commission of the People’s Republic of China notified WHO of one confirmed case of human infection with an avian influenza A(H3N8) virus. The patient was a 56-year-old female from Guangdong province with an onset of illness on 22 February 2023. She was hospitalized for severe pneumonia on 3 March 2023 and subsequently died on 16 March 2023.

The case was detected through the severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) surveillance system. The patient had multiple underlying conditions. She had a history of exposure to live poultry before the onset of the disease, and a history of wild bird presence around her home. No close contacts of the case developed an infection or symptoms of illness at the time of reporting.

Environmental samples were collected from the patient's residence and the wet market where the patient spent time before the onset of illness. The results of testing showed that the samples collected from the wet market were positive for influenza A(H3).

Epidemiology
Zoonotic influenza infections in humans may be asymptomatic or may cause disease. Depending on factors related to the specific virus and the infected host, disease can range from conjunctivitis or mild flu-like symptoms to severe acute respiratory disease or even death. Gastrointestinal or neurological symptoms have been reported but these are rare.

Human cases of infection with avian influenza viruses are usually the result of direct or indirect exposure to infected live or dead poultry or contaminated environments.

Public health response
The Chinese government has taken the following monitoring, prevention, and control measures:

Enhanced monitoring and disinfection in the surrounding environment of the patient’s residence and suspected exposure areas;
Public risk communication activities to improve public awareness and adoption of self-protection measures.
WHO risk assessment
Avian influenza A(H3N8) viruses are commonly detected globally in animals. Influenza A(H3N8) viruses are some of the most commonly found subtypes in birds, causing little to no sign of disease in either domestic poultry or wild birds. Cross-species transmission of A(H3N8) avian influenza viruses has been reported for various mammal species, including being endemic in dogs and horses.

This is the third reported human infection with A(H3N8) from China. Two previous cases were reported in April and May 2022. One of the previous cases developed a critical illness, while the other had a mild illness. Both cases likely acquired infection from direct or indirect exposure to infected poultry. So far, no additional cases linked with this case, nor the previous cases, have been reported. According to reports from health officials, the preliminary epidemiological investigation into this event suggests that exposure to a live poultry market may have been the cause of infection. However, it is still unclear what the exact source of this infection is and how this virus is related to other avian influenza A(H3N8) viruses that are circulating in animals. To better understand the current risk to public health, more information is needed from both human and animal investigation.

The transmission of avian influenza viruses from birds to humans is usually sporadic and happens in a specific context: most human infections with avian influenza viruses that have been reported previously were due to exposure to infected poultry or contaminated environments. Since avian influenza viruses continue to be detected in poultry populations, further sporadic human cases are expected in the future.

The available epidemiological and virological information suggests that avian influenza A(H3N8) viruses do not have the capacity for sustained transmission among humans. Therefore, the current assessment is that the likelihood of human-to-human spread is low. However, due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect virologic, epidemiologic and clinical changes associated with circulating influenza viruses which may affect human (or animal) health. 

WHO advice
To minimize the risk of infection, countries should increase public awareness of the importance of avoiding contact with high-risk environments such as live animal markets/farms, live poultry, or surfaces that may be contaminated by poultry or bird faeces. It is recommended to maintain good hand hygiene by frequently washing hands or using alcohol-based hand sanitizer and wearing respiratory protection when in a risky environment.

Given the observed extent and frequency of avian influenza cases in wild birds and some wild mammals, the public should avoid contact with animals that are sick or dead from unknown causes and should report the occurrence to the authorities.

Travellers to countries with known outbreaks of animal influenza should avoid farms, contact with animals in live animal markets, entering areas where animals may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with animal faeces or other body fluids. Travellers should also wash their hands often with soap and water and follow good food safety and good food hygiene practices.

WHO advises against the application of travel or trade restrictions based on the information available at this time.

Influenza viruses are constantly evolving and large outbreaks occur among animal populations, which is why WHO stresses the importance of global surveillance to detect any changes in virology, epidemiology, and clinical patterns associated with emerging or circulating influenza viruses, which may pose a threat to human or animal health. Collaboration between the animal and human health sectors is essential. As the extent of influenza viruses circulation in animals is not clear, epidemiologic and virologic surveillance and the follow-up of suspected human cases should continue systematically. Timely sharing of information is critical for risk assessment.

The variety of zoonotic influenza viruses that have led to human infections is worrying and demands increased surveillance in both animal and human populations, as well as a comprehensive examination of each zoonotic infection, and planning for pandemics. To prevent a viral mutation that could make human-to-human transmission easier, poultry workers have been recommended to receive seasonal influenza vaccination.

If a human infection with a novel influenza virus that has pandemic potential, such as avian influenza, is confirmed or suspected, even before receiving confirmatory laboratory results,  contact tracing should be immediately initiated. A thorough epidemiological investigation should be conducted, including a history of travel and exposure to animals . The investigation should also involve early identification of unusual clusters of respiratory disease that could indicate person-to-person transmission of the novel virus. Clinical samples collected from the time and place that the case occurred should be tested, and then sent to a WHO Collaborating Centre for further characterization.

Close analysis of the epidemiological situation, further characterization of the most recent viruses found in humans and poultry, and serological investigations, are critical to assess risk and to adjust risk management measures in a timely manner.

Under the International Health Regulations (IHR 2005), States Parties are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of human infection caused by a new subtype of influenza virus. Investigation, virus sharing, and genetic and antigenic characterization of every human infection are essential.

This event does not change the current recommendations from WHO for public health measures and surveillance of influenza.




Situation at a glance
Since mid-December 2022, Togo has been responding to a meningitis outbreak that has so far resulted in a total of 141 cases and 12 deaths (CFR 8.5%), with almost half of the cases affecting children and young adults between 10 and 19 years of age. Overall, 22 samples have been confirmed as Streptococcus pneumoniae. Togo is located in the African meningitis belt, with seasonal outbreaks recurring every year. However, the current outbreak is concerning due to different concomitant factors, including the security crisis in the Sahel which causes population movements, and suboptimal surveillance capacity. This is also the country’s first time dealing with a pneumococcal meningitis outbreak. An incident management system has been established to coordinate the outbreak response activities, and WHO is supporting the shipment of antibiotics (ceftriaxone) to improve case management. WHO assesses the overall risk posed by this outbreak as high at the national level, moderate at the regional level, and low at the global level.
Description of the situation
On 15 February 2023, the Ministry of Health of Togo officially declared a meningitis outbreak in Oti Sud district, Savanes region, in the northern part of the country. From 19 December 2022 to 2 April 2023, a total of 141 suspected cases of meningitis with 12 deaths (CFR 8.5%) have been reported from Oti Sud district, corresponding to an attack rate of 112 per 100 000 population.

Figure 1. Number of reported meningitis cases and deaths, 19 December 2022 (week 51 of 2022) to 2 April 2023 (week 13 of 2023), Oti Sud district, Savanes region, Togo. 

A total of 118 cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples were collected from suspected cases, of which 22 were confirmed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and culture for Streptococcus pneumoniae at the national reference laboratory (81 samples were negative and the results for 15 samples are pending).

The most affected age group is 10–19 years (47%; n = 66), followed by the ≥30-year age group with 20% (n = 28) of cases, and the 20-29 year age group with 15% (n = 22) of cases. There is no difference in the case distribution by gender, with 71 (53%) cases reported among males.

Togo introduced the 13-valent pneumococcal conjugated vaccine (PCV13) in 2014, which is currently administered in three doses at the first, second and third months of life. The administrative PCV13 coverage in the Savanes region is 100% for the third dose, but the immunization history is not available for the individual cases, and it is not known if the serotype(s) involved are covered by the vaccine. Additionally, the most affected age groups were born before the PCV13 introduction in 2014 and could have not received the vaccine.

Epidemiology
Meningitis is a devastating disease with a high case fatality rate and serious long-term complications (sequelae). It remains a major global public-health challenge. Many organisms can cause bacterial meningitis. Neisseria meningitidis, Streptococcus pneumoniae, and Haemophilus influenzae type b constitute the majority of all cases of bacterial meningitis and 90% of bacterial meningitis in children. It is estimated that about one million children die of pneumococcal disease every year.

Streptococcus pneumoniae is an encapsulated bacterium, and about 90 distinct pneumococcal serotypes have been identified throughout the world, with a small number of these serotypes being able to cause disease. Pneumococci are transmitted by direct contact with respiratory secretions from patients and healthy carriers. Serious pneumococcal infections include pneumonia, meningitis and febrile bacteraemia; otitis media, sinusitis and bronchitis are more common but less serious manifestations. The incubation period is two to 10 days. Pneumococcal meningitis has a high case fatality rate (36%–66%) in the African meningitis belt, requires longer treatment than meningococcal meningitis, and is more frequently associated with severe sequelae.

Diagnosis of bacterial meningitis typically requires lumbar puncture. In the absence of lumbar puncture, diagnosis can only be suspected through clinical examination (but not confirmed, except with a positive blood culture). Culture and PCR are confirmatory tests for bacterial meningitis. Rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) can support the diagnosis but are not confirmatory. Identification of serotypes or serogroups and susceptibility to antibiotics are important to define control measures. Molecular typing and whole genome sequencing can identify additional differences between strains and inform public health responses.

A range of antibiotics is used to treat meningitis, including penicillin, ampicillin, and ceftriaxone. During epidemics of meningococcal and pneumococcal meningitis, ceftriaxone is the drug of choice. Nevertheless, pneumococcal resistance to antimicrobials is a serious and rapidly increasing problem worldwide.

Two classes of pneumococcal vaccines are currently available. Conjugate vaccines are effective from six weeks of age at preventing meningitis and other severe pneumococcal infections and are recommended for infants and children up to the age of five years, and in some countries for adults aged over 65 years, as well as individuals from certain risk groups. Two different conjugate vaccines are in use that protects against 10 and 13 serotypes, respectively. New conjugate vaccines designed to protect against more pneumococcal serotypes are either in development or have been approved for use in adults. Conjugate vaccines are also effective in preventing nasopharyngeal carriage. A polysaccharide vaccine against 23 serotypes is available but, as for other polysaccharide vaccines, this type of vaccine is considered less effective than conjugate vaccines. It is used mostly in those aged over 65 years to protect against pneumonia, as well as in individuals from certain risk groups. It is not used in children under two years of age and is less useful in protecting against meningitis.

Public health response
An incident management system has been established to coordinate the outbreak response activities, and coordination meetings are held weekly.
The national outbreak response plan has been developed and validated.
Under the leadership of WHO, cross-border meetings are ongoing with Benin and Ghana to share information about outbreak response activities and strengthen preparedness and readiness.
Health facility managers, community health workers, community relay agents (social workers) and community leaders are being trained on meningitis. Radio spots are broadcasted regarding community-based surveillance and the importance of early healthcare-seeking.
Active case finding is being conducted in health facilities and in the community.
Outbreak situation reports are developed by the Ministry of Health with the support of WHO and disseminated to stakeholders involved in response activities.
WHO has procured and distributed cerebrospinal fluid sample collection and transportation materials to the health facilities in the affected areas.
WHO is supporting the shipment of antibiotics (ceftriaxone) to improve case management.
There are ongoing efforts to facilitate the shipment of the samples for further serotyping at the regional reference laboratory.
WHO is also supporting the mobilization of resources for the implementation of the response plan.
WHO risk assessment
Togo is part of the African meningitis belt and annually records meningitis cases and deaths. Although the country has experience in the management of meningococcal meningitis outbreaks over the past years, the current Streptococcus pneumoniae outbreak is unusual as the country has never managed a pneumococcal meningitis outbreak in the past, and national capacity is limited. 

To date, no imported cases have been reported in neighbouring countries. However, several factors are likely to increase the risk of spread, including the country's location in the African meningitis belt; the epidemic season, which typically runs from January to June; constraints in the provision of vaccination services, which do not allow for optimal vaccination coverage to protect the population; the fact that the main age groups affected by the outbreak are not protected by the routine vaccination against Streptococcus pneumoniae introduced in Togo in 2014; the security crisis in the Sahel, affecting the Savanes region, hampering public health interventions and causing population movements; the precarious economic conditions in the country, particularly in the Savanes region; and the suboptimal surveillance capacity for early case detection, diagnosis and treatment in the Oti Sud district. Neighbouring countries are also in the African meningitis belt, and the Oti Sud district borders Ghana and Benin, making it possible for the disease to spread to other countries in the region.

Considering the above-described situation, WHO assesses the overall risk posed by this outbreak as high at the national level, moderate at the regional level, and low at the global level.

WHO advice
Early diagnosis and appropriate case management are essential, given the high case fatality and risk of developing sequelae due to pneumococcal meningitis. Prompt antibiotic treatment should be ensured for a duration of 10-14 days. Active community-based case-finding and community engagement should be implemented to inform the communities of the signs of meningitis and the importance of early diagnosis and treatment. The collection of detailed epidemiological and microbiological data, including serotyping, is essential to inform the pneumococcal meningitis control strategy.

Pneumococcal conjugate vaccines are effective in preventing meningitis and other serious pneumococcal infections. To date, the available data do not support recommendations for reactive vaccination campaigns against pneumococcal meningitis outbreaks. Recommendations for the use of pneumococcal vaccine in community outbreak settings were discussed by the Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on Immunization (SAGE) in October 2020, with one main conclusion being that more research and evidence gathering was needed from countries of the African meningitis belt, in order to develop a strategy for pneumococcal meningitis outbreak prevention and response.

WHO, with the support of many partners, has developed a Global Roadmap to defeat meningitis by 2030. Concerted actions to achieve this goal are organized around five interrelated pillars:

Prevention and epidemic control by developing new affordable vaccines, achieving high immunization coverage, improving prevention strategies, and responding to epidemics;
Diagnosis and treatment through rapid confirmation of meningitis cases and optimal patient management;
Meningitis surveillance to guide prevention and control;
Management of those affected by meningitis through early case detection and improved access to management of complications; and
Advocacy and engagement to ensure high awareness of meningitis, promote country commitment and affirm the right to prevention, care, and follow-up services.
Based on the information currently available on this outbreak, WHO does not recommend any travel or trade restrictions for Togo.





Situation at a glance
On 29 March 2023, the Ministry of Health of Chile notified WHO of a laboratory-confirmed case of human infection caused by avian influenza A(H5) virus in the Region of Antofagasta. This is the first human infection with avian influenza A(H5) virus reported in Chile and the third reported in the Region of the Americas to date. This is a single human infection, and no further case has been identified so far. An outbreak investigation is ongoing including determining the exposure of the case to the virus. In recent months of 2023, unprecedented outbreaks of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) A(H5N1) in animals have been reported from Chile. Avian Influenza A(H5N1) viruses have been detected among backyard poultry, farm poultry, wild birds, and sea mammals. Avian influenza infection in a human can cause severe disease and is notifiable under the International Health Regulations (IHR, 2005)[1].
Description of the situation

On 29 March 2023, the Ministry of Health of Chile notified WHO of the detection of human infection with avian influenza A(H5) virus, confirmed by the Institute of Public Health of Chile (ISP per its acronym in Spanish), which is the National Influenza Centre. The patient is a 53-year-old male from the Region of Antofagasta in the north of Chile. He had no history of comorbidities or recent travel.

On 13 March 2023, he developed symptoms including cough, sore throat, and hoarseness. On 21 March, due to worsening symptoms, he sought care at a local hospital. On 22 March 2023, the case developed dyspnea and was admitted to a Regional Hospital at Antofagasta. A nasopharyngeal swab sample was collected as part of routine severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) surveillance and tested negative for COVID-19 by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). On 23 March, he was admitted to the intensive care unit. On 24 March, treatment with antivirals (oseltamivir) and antibiotics was initiated. He remains in respiratory isolation under multidisciplinary management, with mechanical ventilation due to pneumonia.  

On 27 March, a bronchoalveolar sample was collected and tested positive for an unsubtypeable influenza A virus by RT-PCR. The sample was sent to the ISP and tested positive for avian influenza A(H5) on 29 March. The neuraminidase type is yet to be confirmed and the clade information for the avian influenza A(H5) virus detected in this human case is not yet known. The NIC has forwarded the patient's samples to a WHO Collaborating Centre for further characterization. 

Three close contacts of the case were asymptomatic and tested negative for influenza and have concluded the monitoring period. Additionally, a total of nine contacts among health care workers were identified, all concluded the monitoring on 4 April, however on 5 April one of them developed respiratory symptoms, therefore, further testing is ongoing, and the period of monitoring was extended for 7 more days for this contact of the case.

Avian influenza A (H5N1) was first detected in the Americas in birds in December 2014. Between December 2022 and February 2023, highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) was detected in wild aquatic birds (pelicans and penguins) and sea mammals (sea lions) in the Antofagasta Region where the case resides. According to preliminary findings of the epidemiological investigation of this human case, the most plausible route of transmission was through environmental exposure in areas close to the residence of the case where either sick or dead sea mammals or wild birds were found.

Epidemiology
Zoonotic influenza infections in humans may range from asymptomatic or mild upper respiratory infection (fever and cough) to rapid progression to severe pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome, shock, and death, depending on factors related to the virus and the host. Rarely, gastrointestinal, or neurological symptoms have been reported. Human cases of avian influenza are usually the result of direct or indirect exposure to infected live or dead poultry or contaminated environments.

In the Region of the Americas during 2022 and 2023, an increasing number of outbreaks of highly pathogenic avian influenza A(H5) have been reported in backyard poultry, farm poultry, wild birds, and wild mammals. Since the first confirmation of avian influenza A(H5N1) in the region in 2014, three human infections caused by avian influenza A(H5) have been reported: the first in the United States of America, reported in April 2022; the second in Ecuador, reported in January 2023; and this case. Globally, since 2003, 873 human infections, including 458 deaths (CFR 52%), with A(H5N1) viruses have been reported to WHO. Additionally, three human infections with influenza A (H5[2]) viruses, 84 human cases of infection with A(H5N6) viruses, and seven human cases of infection with A(H5N8) viruses have been reported to WHO. 

Public health response
Local authorities are carrying out an epidemiological investigation and conducting contact tracing amongst family members and healthcare workers. 
Intersectoral activities have been carried out by the Ministry of Health of Chile, the Agriculture and Livestock Service of the Ministry of Agriculture of Chile, and the National Fisheries and Aquaculture Service of Chile, among others, in order to follow up on the avian influenza outbreaks in the area.  
Active follow-up is being conducted of persons with respiratory symptoms and exposure to wild birds, poultry, and mammals; as well as cases with suspected influenza due to contact with poultry or who have been exposed to birds.
Seasonal influenza vaccination is being conducted in risk groups according to the guidelines of the National Immunization Program. 
The population has been informed, through messaging for different target audiences, about the case and about prevention measures.
WHO risk assessment
According to the preliminary findings of the local epidemiological investigation, the most plausible hypothesis about transmission is that it occurred through environmental exposure to areas where either sick or dead birds or sea mammals were found close to the residence of the case. According to the information received thus far, the virus has not been detected in other individuals.

Whenever avian influenza viruses are circulating in poultry, wild birds or mammals, there is a risk for sporadic infection and small clusters of human cases due to exposure to infected animals or contaminated environments.

Public health measures have been implemented by both the human and animal health agencies, including monitoring healthcare workers and other contacts of the laboratory-confirmed case. While further characterization of the virus from this human case is pending, currently available epidemiological and virological evidence suggests that A(H5) viruses have not acquired the capacity for sustained transmission among humans, thus the likelihood of human-to-human spread is low. Based on available information, WHO assesses the risk to the general population posed by this virus to be low.

Should infected individuals from affected areas travel internationally, their infection may be detected in another country during travel or after arrival. If this were to occur, further community-level spread is considered unlikely as this virus has not acquired the ability to transmit easily among humans.

The preliminary risk assessment will be reviewed as needed should further epidemiological or virological information become available.

WHO advice
Due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, and the large outbreaks among animal populations, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect and monitor virological, epidemiological, and clinical changes associated with emerging or circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal) health, and of timely virus sharing for risk assessment. The diversity of zoonotic influenza viruses that have caused human infections is alarming and necessitates strengthened surveillance in both animal and human populations, thorough investigation of every zoonotic infection, and pandemic preparedness planning. Vaccination of poultry workers with seasonal influenza vaccine has been advised to prevent a viral mutation that could facilitate human-to-human transmission.

WHO does not advise special traveler screening at points of entry.  In the case of a confirmed or suspected human infection (even while awaiting the confirmatory laboratory results) with a novel influenza virus with pandemic potential, including avian influenza and variant viruses, contact tracing should be initiated and a thorough epidemiologic investigation of history of exposure to animals and of travel should be conducted. The epidemiologic investigation should include early identification of unusual clusters of respiratory events that could signal person-to-person transmission of the novel virus, and clinical samples collected from the time and place that the case occurred should be tested and then sent to a WHO Collaborating Centre for further characterization.

There are no approved vaccines for preventing influenza A(H5) in humans. Candidate vaccine viruses to prevent influenza A(H5) infection in humans have been developed for pandemic preparedness purposes.

Given the observed extent and frequency of avian influenza cases in wild birds and some wild mammals, the public should avoid contact with animals that are sick or dead from unknown causes and should report the occurrence to the authorities.

Travelers to countries with known outbreaks of animal influenza should avoid farms, contact with animals in live animal markets, entering areas where animals may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with animal faeces or other body fluids. Travelers should also wash their hands often with soap and water and follow good food safety and good food hygiene practices.

Close analysis of the epidemiological situation, further characterization of the most recent viruses found in humans and poultry, and serological investigations, are critical to assess risk and to adjust risk management measures in a timely manner.

All human infections caused by a novel influenza subtype are notifiable under the International Health Regulations (IHR 2005), and States Parties to the IHR are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a human infection caused by an influenza A virus with the potential to cause a pandemic. Evidence of illness is not required for this notification.



Situation at a glance
On 7 March 2023, the National IHR Focal Point (NFP) for Germany notified WHO of five cases of iatrogenic botulism in individuals who underwent medical procedures with the injection of botulinum neurotoxin type A (BoNT/A) in health institutions in Türkiye. As of 17 March 2023, a total of 71 cases were reported in four countries in the European Region, mainly linked to two hospitals in different locations in Türkiye. The products used for the treatment were seized and taken for examination and evaluation by the Turkish Medicines and Medical Devices Agency. No new symptomatic cases have been reported since 8 March 2023. Outbreaks of botulism are very rare and can be associated with a natural, accidental, or potentially deliberate source of infection.
Description of the situation

On 7 March 2023, the National IHR Focal Point (NFP) for Germany notified WHO of five cases of iatrogenic botulism in individuals who underwent medical procedures with the injection of botulinum neurotoxin type A (BoNT/A) in health institutions in Türkiye.  As of 17 March 2023, a total of 71 clinical botulism cases were reported from Türkiye (53 cases), Germany (16 cases), Austria (one case) and Switzerland (one case) linked to the aforementioned medical interventions performed in Türkiye between 22 February and 1 March 2023.

All cases are adults; most cases are middle-aged women. Among the 69 cases for which treatment location information is known, two private hospitals in two locations in Türkiye were identified, with 66 cases linked to one hospital and three cases to another hospital.

The clinical presentation of the cases ranged from mild to severe. Clinical signs of BoNT intoxication were observed (including fatigue, headache, blurred and/or double vision, dizziness, ptosis, dysphagia, dyspnea, neck weakness, generalized muscle weakness, and swollen tongue). Several cases were hospitalized. Some cases were treated with botulinum antitoxin. At least five cases were admitted to intensive care units. There are no reported deaths.

Investigations carried out by Turkish authorities reported that licensed BoNT products were administered for a different purpose other than for which the products were approved (off-label use). The relevant departments of both hospitals had their activities suspended on 1 March 2023, and investigations have been launched against the parties involved.  The products used for the treatment were seized and taken for examination and evaluation by the Turkish Medicines and Medical Devices Agency. No new symptomatic cases have been reported since 8 March 2023, which was the date of symptom onset for the last reported case.

Public health response
The Turkish Ministry of Health is working with the Türkish Medicines and Medical Devices Agency and the Turkish National Poison Solidarity Center to investigate this event. The Turkish General Directorate of Public Health, Department of Communicable Diseases and Early Warning. is conducting an epidemiological investigation with provincial health centres and related departments. The relevant units of the Ministry of Health and the Turkish Police Service urgently inspected the two hospitals mentioned above. The investigation is currently ongoing to determine if the cause of the intoxication is due to product quality/safety, medical error, or an overdose.

WHO is collaborating with the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC), and the affected IHR State Parties, regarding investigation, risk assessment, information sharing and response for this event.

The Turkish Medicines and Medical Devices Agency published an announcement on its website on 10 March 2023. Similarly, the ECDC announced the current situation regarding this event in their publicly-available Communicable Disease Threats Report on 10 March 2023, and a news story was published on the ECDC website on 14 March 2023.

WHO risk assessment
Botulinum neurotoxins are dangerous toxins produced by several species of the genus Clostridium (e.g., C. botulinum, C. baratii, C. butyricum, and C. sporogenes) under anaerobic conditions. Botulinum neurotoxins are one of the most lethal substances known and occur in eight serotypes (A to H). Botulinum neurotoxins block nerve functions and can lead to muscular, including respiratory, paralysis. Human botulism is a naturally occurring rare disease and may refer to foodborne botulism, infant botulism, wound botulism, and inhalation botulism.

Clostridium botulinum culture is used to produce pharmaceutical botulinum toxin-containing products. These pharmaceutical products employ the purified and heavily diluted botulinum neurotoxin (type A or type B, depending on the indication) injected for clinical use for the treatment of more than 20 neurological and non-neurological disorders, as well as for cosmetic use. Treatment is administered in the medical setting, tailored according to the needs of the patient and desired treatment effect.

The symptoms of botulism can be very severe, requiring intensive-care treatment as well as the administration of specific anti-toxins. Even when such treatments are available, severe botulism cases require supportive treatment, including mechanical ventilation. Complete recovery usually takes weeks to months.

This current event is possibly linked to a specific procedure and/or a medical product in at least two healthcare settings. Further investigations are ongoing regarding case ascertainment and notification. The investigation remains open for other possible hypotheses of intoxication. The respective departments in the two clinics where the procedures were undertaken have been closed since 1 March, with no further cases reported.

There are several clinical indications for the use of botulinum neurotoxin; however, its off-label use in bariatric cases has increased in many countries. Depending on the product used, a warning of toxic effects may be insufficiently worded, and the risks not adequately addressed in the patient consent process. 

WHO advice
Botulism outbreaks are rare, but outbreaks require rapid recognition to identify the source of the disease, distinguish between types of outbreaks (natural, accidental or potentially deliberate), prevent additional cases, and effectively administer treatment to affected patients.

Successful treatment depends significantly on early diagnosis and the rapid administration of the botulinum antitoxins. Iatrogenic botulism should be suspected if a patient has recently received botulinum neurotoxin, and clinicians should remain mindful of the risk of systemic botulism with BoNT therapy. The diagnostic detection of BoNT/A in patients suffering from iatrogenic botulism might be highly challenging due to the extremely low dose of toxin present and the potentially suboptimal timepoint of serum sampling. So far, very few detection methods have been shown to be validated on clinical specimens with a sensitivity better than the classical mouse bioassay, which is still regarded as a reference for BoNT detection in clinical samples. At this time, it cannot be confirmed if the reported cases of botulism intoxication are due to product quality/safety, medical error, or an overdose.

Although the source of the outbreak may have been removed, WHO Member States need to remain vigilant. It is therefore critically important for the IHR State Parties to identify any additional possible case, to establish the cause, and to determine if the product used in the procedure could be substandard or falsified. Investigation of these cases will assist in rapid containment at the disease source to prevent additional possible cases.

WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions to Türkiye based on the information available for this event.




Situation at a glance
On 21 March 2023, the Ministry of Health (MoH) of the United Republic of Tanzania declared an outbreak of Marburg virus disease (MVD) in the country. As of 22 March, a total of eight cases, including five deaths (case fatality ratio [CFR]: 62.5%) have been reported from two villages in Bukoba district, Kagera region, United Republic of Tanzania. Two of these cases were healthcare workers, one of whom has died. This is the first Marburg virus disease outbreak reported in the country. As response measures, Rapid Response Teams have been deployed to investigate and implement interventions in the affected areas, including contact tracing and risk communication activities. WHO assesses the risk of spread as very high at the national level, high at the subregional level, and moderate at the regional level due to cross-border movements between Kagera region and bordering countries including Uganda in the north, Rwanda and Burundi in the west. The risk at the global level is assessed to be low.
Description of the situation

On 16 March 2023, the MoH of the United Republic of Tanzania announced that seven cases and five deaths from an unknown disease had been reported in two villages in Bukoba district, Kagera region, northern Tanzania. The cases were later confirmed as Marburg virus infection by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) at the National Public Health Laboratory, Tanzania. On 21 March 2023, the MoH officially declared the first MVD outbreak in the country.

As of 22 March, eight cases, including five deaths (case fatality ratio [CFR]: 62.5%) have been reported from Kagera region. The remaining three patients are currently undergoing treatment. As of 22 March, no cases have been reported from outside the Bukoba district of Kagera Region.

The first identified case reported travel history from Goziba Island in Lake Victoria in Tanzania and developed symptoms after returning to his village in Bukoba. The case died in the community. Four additional cases were identified from the same family as this index case. Further, two cases were reported among healthcare workers who treated them, one of whom died. No information is available on the eighth case; investigations are ongoing. Reported symptoms of the patients were fever, diarrhoea, vomiting, bleeding from various sites, and kidney failure. Samples from both deceased and live cases were taken and confirmed for Marburg virus by the National Public Health Laboratory.

Epidemiology
Marburg virus disease is an epidemic-prone disease associated with high case-fatality rates (CFR 24-90%). It is caused by the same family of viruses (Filoviridae) as Ebola virus disease and is clinically similar. The current CFR for this outbreak is relatively high, at 62.5%.

Marburg virus infection often results from prolonged exposure to mines or caves inhabited by Rousettus bat colonies. Once an individual is infected with the virus, it can spread through human-to-human transmission via direct contact with the blood, secretions or other body fluids of infected or deceased people. Healthcare workers have previously been infected while treating patients with suspected or confirmed MVD. Burial ceremonies that involve direct contact with the body of the deceased can also contribute to the transmission of Marburg.

The incubation period varies from two to 21 days. Illness caused by Marburg virus begins abruptly, with high fever, severe headache, and severe malaise. Severe watery diarrhoea, abdominal pain and cramping, nausea, and vomiting can begin around the third day. Severe haemorrhagic manifestations may appear between five and seven days from symptom onset, and fatal cases usually have some form of bleeding, often from multiple areas. In fatal cases, death occurs most often between eight and nine days after symptom onset, usually preceded by severe blood loss and shock.

Clinical diagnosis of MVD is difficult in the early phase as symptoms are similar to other febrile illnesses. The differential diagnosis for MVD may include other filovirus diseases, Lassa fever, malaria, typhoid fever, dengue, rickettsial infections, leptospirosis and plague.

Laboratory confirmation is primarily made by RT-PCR. Other tests can be used such as antibody-capture enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), antigen-capture detection tests, serum neutralization tests, electron microscopy, and virus isolation by cell culture.

Although there are no vaccines or antiviral treatments for MVD, supportive care – such as rehydration with oral or intravenous fluids – and treatment of specific symptoms improve survival. A range of potential treatments are being evaluated, including blood products, immune therapies, and drug therapies.

This is the first time that Tanzania has reported an outbreak of MVD. Even though there is an ongoing outbreak of MVD in Equatorial Guinea (for more details, please see the Disease outbreak news published on 22 March), so far there is no evidence of an epidemiological link between the two outbreaks. Other MVD outbreaks have been previously reported in Ghana (2022), Guinea (2021), Uganda (2017, 2014, 2012, 2007), Angola (2004-2005), the Democratic Republic of the Congo (1998 and 2000), Kenya (1990, 1987, 1980) and South Africa (1975).

Public health response
Regional and district-level Rapid Response Teams have been deployed to investigate and implement response measures.
Contact tracing activities have been implemented to monitor people with similar symptoms in the community and at health facilities, including contacts of the known cases. A total of 161 contacts have been identified and 140 have been followed up and monitored by health professionals on 21 March.
Risk communication activities have also been initiated in the Kagera Region to provide health awareness education and prevention messages.
WHO risk assessment
The United Republic of Tanzania has reported its first outbreak of MVD, which is a highly virulent disease, with a fatality ratio of up to 90%. The affected region, Kagera, borders three countries (Uganda to the north, and Rwanda and Burundi to the west) and Lake Victoria, and cross-border population movements may increase the risk of disease spread. In addition, Marburg virus has been isolated from fruit bats (Roussettus aegyptiacus) in Tanzania and countries neighboring the affected Kagera region, therefore, the same bat species may carry the virus in this region.

Due to the high CFR and existing risk of spread of the outbreak to other areas of the country, inadequate human, financial and material resources to implement response interventions, and the likelihood of existing capacities being overwhelmed if the cases increase, the risk at the national level is assessed as very high.

Following the recent Ebola virus outbreaks in the Democratic Republic of the Congo from 23 April - 3 July 2022 and from 21 August - 27 September 2022, and Sudan ebolavirus outbreak in Uganda from 20 September 2022 to 11 January 2023, neighbouring countries in the subregion, including the United Republic of Tanzania, have been building preparedness capacities against filovirus diseases. In the West African region, an outbreak of MVD was declared on 13 February 2023 in Equatorial Guinea and is ongoing.

Based on the available information, the risk is considered as high at the subregional level, moderate at the regional level and low at the global level.

WHO advice
Human-to-human transmission of Marburg virus is primarily associated with direct contact with the blood and/or other bodily fluids of infected people. Marburg virus transmission associated with health care services has been reported in previous outbreaks when appropriate infection control measures were not or were inadequately implemented.

Healthcare workers caring for patients with confirmed or suspected MVD should apply additional infection prevention and control  measures in addition to standard precautions, to avoid contact with patients' blood and other body fluids and with contaminated surfaces and objects.

Surveillance and detection activities, including contact tracing and active case finding, should be strengthened in all affected health zones. Measures to contain outbreaks of MVD include prompt safe and dignified burial of the deceased, identification of people who may have been in contact with someone infected with Marburg virus and monitoring their condition for 21 days, separation of healthy and sick people to prevent further transmission and care for confirmed patients, and maintenance of good hygiene and a clean environment.

Raising awareness of the risk factors for Marburg infection and the protective measures that individuals can take to reduce human exposure to the virus are key measures to reduce human infections and deaths.

WHO encourages all countries to ship samples (positive or negative) to a WHO Collaborating Center for confirmation.

Based on the current risk assessment, WHO advises against any travel and trade restrictions with the United Republic of Tanzania.




Description of the situation
The increase in the incidence and geographical distribution of arboviral diseases, including chikungunya and dengue, is a major public health problem in the Region of the Americas (1). Dengue accounts for the largest number of cases in the Region, with epidemics occurring every three to five years. Although dengue and chikungunya are endemic in most countries of Central America, South America, and the Caribbean, in the current summer season, increased transmission and expansion of chikungunya cases have been observed beyond historical areas of transmission. Furthermore, 2023 is showing intense dengue transmission. In addition, higher transmission rates are expected in the coming months in the southern hemisphere, due to weather conditions favourable for the proliferation of mosquitoes.

There have been 2.8 million dengue cases reported in the Americas in 2022, which represents over a two-fold increase when compared to the 1.2 million cases reported in 2021. The same increasing trend has been observed for chikungunya, with a high incidence of meningoencephalitis possibly associated to chikungunya reported by Paraguay, which is of further concern.

At the regional level, WHO is assessing the risk as high due to the widespread presence of vector mosquitoes, the continued risk of severe disease and even death, and the expansion outside of historical areas of transmission, where all the population, including risk groups and healthcare workers, may not be aware of clinical manifestations of the disease, including severe clinical manifestations; and where populations may be immunologically naïve (2).

Regional overview 

In 2022, a total of 3 123 752 cases (suspected and confirmed) of arboviral disease were reported in the Region of the Americas. Of these, 2 809 818 (90%) were dengue cases and 273 685 (9%) were chikungunya cases. This represents a proportional increase of approximately 119% compared to 2021. In 2022, both dengue and chikungunya peaked at epidemiological week (EW) 18 (week commencing 1 May 2022) (3).

Dengue

Regional overview

In 2022, a total of 2 809 818 cases of dengue, including 1290 deaths, representing a two-fold increase in cases and almost three-fold increase in deaths compared with the cases reported in 2021 (1 269 004 cases, including 437 deaths). During the same period, the highest cumulative incidence of dengue cases was reported in the following countries: Nicaragua with 1455.4 cases per 100 000 population, followed by Brazil with 1104.5 cases per 100 000 population, and Belize with 788.9 cases per 100 000 population (3).

Between 1 January 2023 and 4 March 2023, a total of 342 243 dengue cases including 86 deaths were reported in the Region of the Americas. During the same period, the highest cumulative incidence of dengue cases was reported in Bolivia, with 264.4 cases per 100 000 population, followed by Nicaragua with 196.8 cases per 100 000 population, and Belize with 145.6 cases per 100 000 population (3).

Figure 1. Distribution of suspected dengue cases, by epidemiological Week, Region of the Americas,1 January 2020 to 4 March 2023.

Country overview  

Bolivia: Between 1 January and 11 February 2023, a total of 31 283 cases including 50 deaths were reported from Bolivia. Of the reported cases, 47% (n = 14 842) were laboratory-confirmed cases, and 110 cases were classified as severe dengue cases. The confirmed cases were reported from seven of the nine departments. Of these seven affected departments, three accounted for 90% of the reported cases: including Santa Cruz (72%; 10 759 cases, 36 deaths), Beni (9.6%; 1387 cases, 11 deaths), and Tarija (9.3%; 1431 cases, three deaths) (4). The cumulative incidence was 264.4 cases per 100 000 population for dengue. As of EW 6, the case fatality rate at the national level is 0.083%. During the same period, dengue virus type 2 (DENV 2) was reported as the predominant serotype circulating in the country (4). The highest number of cases was reported in 2020, with 111 347 cases. Of these, 33% (n=37 293) were reported between EW 1 through EW 6. In 2023, a total of 31 283 cases of dengue have been reported (4).  

Paraguay: Between 1 January and 4 March 2023, a total of 686 cases have been reported. The country has not reported any severe dengue cases or deaths during this period. Confirmed cases have been reported from all the departments, of which three accounted for 50% of the reported cases: Central (22%; n=149), Amambay (15%; n=101), and Asunción (14%; n = 93). As of EW 8 of 2023, DENV 1 and DENV 2 were reported as circulating in the country, with DENV 1 predominant (5). The first large dengue outbreak was reported in the country in 2020, with 223 782 cases. Of these, 65% (n= 146 375) of the cases were reported between EW 1 and EW 7 (5).  

Peru: Between 1 January and 4 March 2023, a total of 20 017 dengue cases have been reported, including 25 deaths. Of these cases, 80 were classified as severe dengue cases. Confirmed cases were reported from 19 of the 25 regions and from 80 provinces. As of EW 10 of 2023, DENV 1, DENV 2, and DENV 3 serotypes have been detected as circulating, with DENV 1 predominant. The highest cumulative incidence of dengue in Peru was recorded in 2017, with 68 290 cases reported (6, 7).

Chikungunya

Regional overview

Between 1 January and 4 March 2023, a total of 113 447 cases of chikungunya were reported in the Region of the Americas, including 51 deaths, representing a four-fold increase in cases and deaths compared with the same period in 2022 (21 887 cases, including eight deaths). These counts also exceeded the average number of cases for the previous five years for EW1 through EW10. Of the cases reported in the Region, the highest cumulative incidence of chikungunya cases was reported in Paraguay with 1103.4 cases per 100 000 population, followed by Brazil with 14.2 cases per 100 000 population, and Belize with 10.4 cases per 100 000 population. Of the total deaths reported in 2023, all were reported from Paraguay (3).

In 2022, the number of cases exceeded the average for the previous four years (2018-2021), with a total of 273 685 cases including 87 deaths, representing a two-fold increase in cases and seven-fold increase in deaths compared with the cases reported in 2021 (137 025 cases, including 12 deaths). Of the total deaths reported in 2022, all were reported from Brazil (3).

Figure 2. Chikungunya cases by epidemiological week (EW) of report. Region of the Americas, 1 January 2020- 4 March 2023 (until EW 9 of 2023). 

Country overview

Argentina: Between 1 January 2023 and 12 March 2023, a total of 341 laboratory-confirmed cases have been reported, with no deaths. Of the cases, 60% were imported (acquired the infection during their stay or trip outside the country) (8). Five provinces are currently reporting local transmission of chikungunya: Buenos Aires Province, Buenos Aires City, Córdoba, Corrientes, and Formosa. These provinces have not reported autochthonous cases of chikungunya previously (8). During the same period in 2022, no autochthonous cases of chikungunya were reported (8).

Bolivia: Between 1 January and 11 March 2023, a total of 593 cases of chikungunya were reported, representing an 11-fold increase in cases compared with the same period in 2022. Over this period, no deaths have been reported and the national cumulative incidence was five cases per 100 000 population (4).

Brazil: Between 1 January and 11 March 2023, a total of 50 103 cases of chikungunya were reported, representing an 83% relative increase compared with the same period in 2022. Six deaths were confirmed in Espírito Santo and Minas Gerais, and 23 deaths remain under investigation. Cases were reported from all 27 Federal Units (9). As of 11 March 2023, the national cumulative incidence was 23.5 cases per 100 000 population. The highest cumulative incidence was reported in the Southern region of the country, with 35 484 cases (39.5 cases per 100 000 population). (9)

Paraguay:  Between 2 October 2022 and 4 March 2023, a total of 40 984 cases were reported, including 3510 hospitalized cases and 46 deaths. Of these, 0.3% (n = 162) occurred in neonates, including eight deaths. Additionally, between EW 1 and 9 of 2023, a total of 294 suspected cases of acute meningoencephalitis were reported, 42.5% (n = 125) of which were attributed to chikungunya, and 42% (n=53) of which were among neonates (5). Confirmed and probable cases were reported  in all the departments of the country. The highest number of cases was reported in two departments: Central (24 556 cases, including 32 deaths) and Asunción (9981 cases, including 11 deaths) (5).

Peru:  Between 1 January 2023 and 4 March 2023, 97 cases of chikungunya were reported, representing an increase of more than three-fold compared with the same period in 2022. Confirmed cases were reported in four departments; the highest proportion of cases was reported in Piura (69%; n = 67 cases), followed by San Martin (29%: n = 28 cases) (6,7).

Epidemiology
Arboviral diseases, such as dengue and chikungunya, are caused by viral infections transmitted to humans through bites of infected mosquitoes. These diseases are global public health threats in the tropical and sub-tropical areas where approximately 3.9 billion people live. (10)

Dengue

Dengue is found in tropical and sub-tropical climates worldwide, mostly in urban and semi-urban areas. The primary vectors that transmit the disease are Aedes aegypti mosquitoes and, to a lesser extent, Aedes albopictus.

Dengue is caused by the dengue virus (DENV), an RNA virus of the family Flaviviridae. There are four distinct but closely related serotypes of the virus (DENV-1, DENV-2, DENV-3 and DENV-4). Infection with one serotype provides long-term immunity to the homologous serotype but not to the other serotypes; sequential infections put people at greater risk for severe dengue, which can include shock or respiratory distress due to plasma leakage, severe bleeding, organ impairment, and death.

There is no specific treatment for dengue; however, timely detection of cases, identifying any warning signs of severe dengue infection, and appropriate case management, are key elements of care to prevent death and can lower fatality rates of severe infection to below 1%.

The Region of the Americas has been collecting epidemiological data on dengue since 1980.  Since that time, the virus has spread throughout most of the Region. The highest number of dengue cases were reported in 2019, with more than 3.1 million cases, including 28 203 severe cases and 1773 deaths.

Chikungunya

Chikungunya is a mosquito-borne viral disease that causes fever and severe joint pain. The disease was first recognized in 1952 during an outbreak in southern Tanzania.

Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) is most commonly transmitted by female mosquitoes of the species Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus, which can also transmit other mosquito-borne viruses, including dengue and Zika. They bite throughout daylight hours, although there may be peaks of activity in the early morning and late afternoon. 

According to the duration of the clinical manifestations, chikungunya may be acute, sub-acute and chronic. Severe symptoms progressing to death are rare; however, patients at extremes of the age spectrum are at higher risk for severe disease. The disease is clinically characterized by the sudden onset of fever, frequently accompanied by severe and debilitating arthralgia or arthritis, that varies in duration; neurological complications, such as Guillain-Barré syndrome and meningoencephalitis, have been reported. Most patients recover fully from the infection, and the infection can provide lifelong immunity.

Neonatal chikungunya has also been described. Most CHIKV infections during pregnancy will not result in the virus being transmitted to the fetus. The highest transmission risk appears to be when women are infected during the intrapartum period, where the vertical transmission rate is as high as 49% (11).

Infants are typically asymptomatic at birth and then develop fever, irritability, rash, and peripheral edema. Those infected during the intrapartum period may also develop neurologic disease (e.g., meningoencephalitis, white matter lesions, cerebral oedema, and intracranial hemorrhage), hemorrhagic symptoms, and myocardial disease. Laboratory abnormalities included raised liver function tests, reduced platelet and lymphocyte counts, and decreased prothrombin levels. Neonates who suffer from neurologic disease often develop long-term disabilities. There is no evidence that the virus is transmitted through breast milk.

Autochthonous transmission of chikungunya virus was first confirmed in the Region of the Americas in December 2013, followed by epidemic propagation in 2014. Since then, the virus has spread throughout the region.

Public health response
WHO has been supporting Member States in the Region of the Americas in preparedness and response to outbreaks, including organization of health services. The support provided includes:

Surveillance:

Actively working with the Member States to strengthen healthcare and surveillance capacity as part of the implementation of the Integrated Management Strategy for the Prevention and Control of Arboviral Diseases (IMS-Arbovirus).
Supporting the implementation of effective integrated vector surveillance and control by Member States through regularly publishing guidelines and the provision of epidemiological surveillance materials and technical assistance to national authorities. 
Virtual cooperation spaces (VCS) have been created as an effort of collaborative surveillance between WHO and Member States; these allow the automated generation of different epidemiological analyses, situation rooms, and epidemiological bulletins, strengthening the epidemiological surveillance of dengue and chikungunya, as well as Zika.
Laboratory:

Supporting increases in laboratory capacity, to enable timely and accurate diagnosis and case detection throughout the region.
Clinical Management:

A package of interventions has been prepared for countries to strengthen clinical management, including the development and dissemination of case management guidelines, the provision of virtual training materials, and the conformation of subnational networks of clinical trainers to provide clinical training at local levels.
WHO experts are regularly being deployed to countries that are experiencing high magnitude outbreaks (Paraguay and Bolivia).
Advocacy and planning:

In 2020, WHO began a collaboration with the Andean Health Organization - Hipólito Unanue Agreement (ORAS-CONHU) to strengthen national technical capacities for the prevention and control of arboviral diseases in Bolivia, Colombia, Chile, Ecuador, Peru and Venezuela. This collaboration falls under the framework of the IMS-Arbovirus, approved by WHO.
In 2022, WHO launched the Global Arbovirus Initiative, an integrated strategic plan to tackle emerging and re-emerging arboviruses with epidemic and pandemic potential, focusing on risk monitoring, pandemic prevention, preparedness, detection and response, and building a coalition of partners.
Risk Communication and community engagement:

WHO is providing advice on risk assessment and risk communication.
Generic communication materials have been developed that are easily adapted for use in country campaigns.
WHO is encouraging source reduction measures by families and communities to eliminate mosquito breeding sites in and around homes; and the use of personal protection of family members during the day.
WHO risk assessment
Dengue and chikungunya can have serious public health impacts. The viruses that cause these infections have been circulating in the Region of the Americas for decades due to the widespread spread of the Aedes spp. mosquitoes (mainly, Aedes aegypti). These arboviruses can be carried by infected travelers (imported cases) and may establish new areas of local transmission in the presence of vectors and a susceptible population. As they are arboviruses, all populations in areas where the mosquito vectors are present are at risk, however, the impact is greatest among the most vulnerable people, for which the arboviral disease programs do not have enough resources to respond to outbreaks.

Although dengue and chikungunya are endemic in most tropical and subtropical countries of the Americas and the Caribbean, increased transmission and expansion of chikungunya cases has been observed beyond historical areas of transmission. Furthermore, 2023 is showing intense dengue transmission.

The impact of the increased transmission in the Region will depend on several factors, including country capacities for a coordinated public health response and for clinical management; the early start of the arbovirus season in the southern cone; high mosquito densities due to interrupted vector control activities during the COVID-19 pandemic; and the large population susceptible to arbovirus infections, particularly in areas where these viruses are newly circulating. Competing disease priorities and risks may adversely affect disease control and proper clinical management, because of (i) misdiagnosis, given that chikungunya and dengue symptoms may be non-specific and resemble other infections, including Zika and measles, potentially leading to inadequate case management; (ii) overwhelmed healthcare facilities in some areas dealing with a high caseload and other concurrent outbreaks; and (iii) the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the decrease of resources available to arboviral disease programs and the need for capacity building and training of vector-control and healthcare workers, as well as maintenance and procurement of equipment and insecticides to perform vector control activities.

The apparent higher proportion of acute meningoencephalitis attributed to chikungunya in Paraguay is of concern. It is not yet known what is causing a higher rate of neurologic disease, which is considered an atypical clinical presentation. Sequencing has identified the East-Central-South-African (ECSA) lineage, which is expanding in geographic range within the region, having first been identified in Brazil in 2014. Introduction of chikungunya virus into new areas with immunologically naïve populations would promote further spread.

Aedes spp. mosquitoes are widely distributed in the Region of the Americas, therefore cross-border transmission of dengue and chikungunya is likely. Countries bordering areas with very high transmission of these diseases may be at higher risk,  e.g., those adjacent to Bolivia (dengue) and Paraguay (chikungunya). Additionally, the Southern Hemisphere summer, with high temperatures and high levels of humidity, affects vector dynamics and may increase the likelihood of arboviruses transmission.

Thus, the risk at the regional level is assessed as high, due to the widespread presence of the mosquito vector species (especially Aedes aegypti), the continued risk of severe disease and even death, and the expansion outside of historical areas of transmission, where all the population, including risk groups and healthcare workers, may not be aware of warning signs and may be immunologically naïve. Moreover, one country in the Region (Paraguay) is experiencing an unprecedented increase of chikungunya cases, and another country in the Region (Bolivia) is experiencing high incidence of dengue cases.

Other challenges reported by Member States in the Region include stockouts of several essential supplies for prevention and control, lack of reagents and consumables for laboratory diagnosis, and the need for re-training of field teams and health workers. In addition, higher transmission rates are expected in the coming months, due to weather conditions favourable for vector breeding in the first semester of the year in the southern hemisphere.

WHO advice
Prevention efforts should be highly focused on the surveillance and control of Aedes spp. mosquitoes (the most competent vector in the region). Targeted integrated vector surveillance and control measures are helpful to reduce transmission rates. Early detection of severe disease progression and access to proper medical attention is the key to lowering severity and mortality. Personal protective measures to prevent mosquito bites (e.g., through application of mosquito repellents, sleeping under insecticide-treated bed nets during biting hours, and wearing long sleeves and pants) should be maintained by the communities at workplaces, schools and at homes. The highest risk for transmission of DENV and CHIKV is during the day and early evening.

No specific antiviral treatment exists for chikungunya and dengue. Clinical management is based on supportive care, including fluids and antipyretics. As symptoms of these arboviruses may overlap, clinical-epidemiological diagnosis may be challenging, and there is serologic cross-reactivity between dengue and Zika viruses, hindering accurate diagnosis, which can lead to inadequate case management and compromise efficient epidemiological surveillance. Molecular diagnosis with RT-PCR is thus recommended.

It is very important that the Member States in the Americas be extremely vigilant and prepared to intensify actions to prevent, early detect, diagnose, and control arboviruses, including training and alerting healthcare workers on the detection of cases and potential complications of these diseases, identification of risk groups for severe disease, appropriate clinical management of cases to prevent deaths, and active cross-border coordination and information sharing because of the possibility of cases in neighbouring countries. Given the incidence of arboviral diseases over the last three years, an increase in arbovirus cases is expected in the first half of 2023 in the southern hemisphere, and may be followed by a high transmission season in the countries located in northern South America, Central America and the Caribbean, given the susceptible populations and increasing temperatures.

Based on the currently available information, WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions for countries in the Americas experiencing the current arboviral epidemics.






Situation at a glance
Since the first Disease Outbreak News on this event was published on 25 February 2023, eight additional laboratory-confirmed cases of Marburg virus disease (MVD) have been reported in Equatorial Guinea. This brings the total to nine laboratory-confirmed cases and 20 probable cases since the declaration of the outbreak in February 2023. There are seven deaths among the laboratory confirmed, and all probable cases are dead. Of the eight new confirmed cases, two were reported from the province of Kié-Ntem, four from the Litoral, and two from Centre- Sur provinces. The areas reporting cases are about 150 kilometers apart, suggesting wider transmission of the virus. WHO has deployed experts to support national response efforts and strengthen community engagement in the response. MVD is a highly virulent disease that causes haemorrhagic fever, and is among the viral haemorrhagic fevers that require assessment under the International Health Regulations. WHO assesses the risk posed by the outbreak as very high at the national level, moderate at the regional level, and low at the global level.
Description of the situation
On 7 February 2023, the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare of Equatorial Guinea reported at least eight suspected MVD deaths that occurred between 7 January and 7 February 2023, in two villages located in the district of Nsok Nsomo, in the eastern province of Kié-Ntem, Río Muni Region.

On 12 February 2023, eight blood samples were collected from contacts and sent to the Institute Pasteur in Dakar, Senegal, where one of these samples was confirmed positive for Marburg virus by real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). This case presented with fever, vomiting, blood-stained diarrhoea, convulsions, and died on 10 February 2023 in a hospital. The case also had epidemiological links to four deceased suspected cases from one of the villages in Nsok-Nsomo district.

On 13 March 2023, samples from two additional individuals from Kié-Ntem province tested positive for MVD by RT-PCR performed at a mobile laboratory at the Regional Hospital of Ebibeyin. Another sample, obtained from a resident of Litoral province in the western part of the country, epidemiologically linked to a confirmed case in Kié-Ntem, tested positive for MVD on 15 March 2023 following RT-PCR performed by the same laboratory. The two provinces (Kié-Ntem and Litoral) are located in different parts of the country, about 150 kilometers apart. On 18 and 20 March three additional laboratory confirmed positive cases were reported from Litoral province. On 20 March two more laboratory confirmed cases were reported from Centre Sur province. The wide geographic distribution of cases and uncertain epidemiological links in Centre Sur province suggests the potential for undetected community spread of the virus.

Overall, since the beginning of the outbreak and as of 21 March, a cumulative number of nine confirmed and 20 probable cases have been recorded in Equatorial Guinea.

Epidemiology
Marburg virus and the closely related Ravn virus are the causative agents of Marburg virus disease, which has a case-fatality ratio of up to 88%. Marburg virus disease was initially detected in 1967 after simultaneous outbreaks in Marburg and Frankfurt in Germany, and in Belgrade, Serbia. Rousettus aegyptiacus fruit bats are considered natural hosts for Marburg virus, from which the virus is then transmitted to people.

Marburg spreads between people via direct contact through broken skin or mucous membranes with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected people, and with surfaces and materials such as bedding, clothing contaminated with these fluids. Healthcare workers have previously been infected while treating patients with suspected or confirmed MVD. Burial ceremonies that involve direct contact with the body of the deceased can also contribute to the transmission of Marburg.

The incubation period varies from two to 21 days. Illness caused by Marburg virus begins abruptly, with high fever, severe headache, and severe malaise. Severe watery diarrhoea, abdominal pain and cramping, nausea, and vomiting can begin on the third day. Severe haemorrhagic manifestations may appear between five and seven days from symptom onset, and fatal cases usually have some form of bleeding, often from multiple areas. In fatal cases, death occurs most often between eight and nine days after symptom onset, usually preceded by severe blood loss and shock.

In the early course of the disease, the clinical diagnosis of MVD is difficult to distinguish from many other tropical febrile illnesses due to the similarities in the clinical symptoms. Other viral haemorrhagic fevers need to be excluded, including Ebola virus disease, as well as malaria, typhoid fever, leptospirosis, rickettsial infections, and plague.

Laboratory confirmation is primarily made by RT-PCR. Other tests can be used such as antibody-capture enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), antigen-capture detection tests, serum neutralization test, electron microscopy, and virus isolation by cell culture.

Although no vaccines or antiviral treatments are approved to treat the virus, supportive care – rehydration with oral or intravenous fluids – and treatment of specific symptoms improve survival. A range of potential treatments are being evaluated, including blood products, immune therapies, and drug therapies.

This is the first time that Equatorial Guinea has reported an outbreak of MVD. The most recently reported outbreak of MVD was in Ghana in 2022 (where there were three confirmed cases). Other MVD outbreaks have been previously reported in Guinea (2021), Uganda (2017, 2014, 2012, 2007), Angola (2004-2005), the Democratic Republic of the Congo (1998 and 2000), Kenya (1990, 1987, 1980) and South Africa (1975).

Public health response
In-depth epidemiological investigations are ongoing to determine the source of the outbreak.
National teams have been deployed to the affected districts for active case finding, contact tracing, and clinical management of suspected cases.
WHO has deployed experts in epidemiology, case management, infection prevention and control (IPC), laboratory, and risk communication to support national response efforts and ensure community engagement.
WHO has shipped materials for sample collection and analysis, and viral haemorrhagic fever kits including personal protective equipment for 500 health workers.
WHO is supporting the training of national responders in surveillance, case management, IPC, safe and dignified burial (SDB), and risk communication and community engagement (RCCE).
The Government has activated the public health emergency operation center (PHEOC) at Ebibeyin and now in Bata under the leadership of the Minister of Health and the District Chief Medical Officer.
WHO is supporting ongoing community engagement activities to create awareness, share prevention information, and encourage reporting of alerts.
Alert systems have been established with the availability of a hotline.
WHO risk assessment
Equatorial Guinea is facing an outbreak of MVD for the first time while the country's capacity to manage the outbreak needs to be strengthened.

In addition to the one confirmed case reported in the Disease Outbreak News of 25 February, eight more individuals have tested positive for MVD, indicating that exposure to the virus may be more widespread.

All three affected provinces have international borders with Cameroon and Gabon. Cross-border population movements are frequent, and the borders are very porous. Although no MVD cases have been reported outside Equatorial Guinea the risk of international spread cannot be ruled out.

Considering the above-described situation, and based on newly available information since the last update, the geographical spread of the outbreak in Equatorial Guinea and the uncertain epidemiological links for some of the confirmed cases, the risk assessment is currently being reviewed, however, it is considered very high at the national level, high at sub-regional level, moderate at the regional level and low at the global level.

WHO advice
Marburg virus disease outbreak control relies on using a range of interventions, such as prompt isolation and case management; surveillance including active case search, case investigation and contact tracing; an optimal laboratory service; infection prevention and control, including prompt safe and dignified burial; and social mobilization – community engagement is key to successfully controlling MVD outbreaks. Raising awareness of risk factors for Marburg infection and protective measures that individuals can take is an effective way to reduce human transmission.

Healthcare workers caring for patients with confirmed or suspected MVD should apply additional IPC measures beyond standard precautions to avoid contact with patients’ blood and body fluids and with contaminated surfaces and objects.

WHO recommends that male survivors of MVD practice safer sex and hygiene for 12 months from onset of symptoms, or until their semen twice tests negative for the Marburg virus. Contact with body fluids should be avoided and washing with soap and water is recommended. WHO does not recommend isolation of male or female convalescent patients whose blood has tested negative for the Marburg virus.

Based on the available information and current risk assessment, WHO advises against any travel and trade restrictions in Equatorial Guinea.




Situation at a glance
Sporadic cases of measles were reported in South Africa throughout 2022. In epidemiological week 40 in 2022 (ending 8 October 2022) an outbreak was declared in Limpopo province. As of 16 March 2023, confirmed cases have been reported from all provinces; eight out of nine South African provinces have declared measles outbreaks1. No deaths associated with measles have been recorded. Most cases (86%) are reported among those aged under 14 years. Community-based surveillance has been strengthened and the Ministry of Health (MoH) is conducting a mass measles vaccination campaign targeting children aged between 6 months and 15 years in all provinces. WHO assesses the risk posed by the current outbreak as high at the national level, moderate at the regional level and low at the global level.
Description of the situation

South Africa is a measles-endemic country, with several measles outbreaks reported in recent years.

Sporadic cases were reported in all nine provinces in South Africa in 2022. As of 4 March 2023, measles outbreaks were declared in eight provinces, further to the outbreak which was declared in Limpopo province in October 2022 (Figure 1).

Figure 1: Epidemiological curve of laboratory-confirmed measles cases in South Africa from week 40, 2022 to week 10, 2023 Source: NICD South African Measles Outbreak 2023 Update 16 March



From epidemiological week 40, 2022 (ending 8 October 2022) to week 10, 2023 (ending 4 March 2023), the National Institute of Communicable Diseases (NICD) tested 4830 serum samples for measles, of which 772 (16%) were confirmed measles cases (Figure 2).

Figure 2: Number of serum samples tested by NICD and positivity rate (%) in South Africa, week 40 of 2022 to week 10 of 2023



The 772 laboratory-confirmed measles cases were reported from the provinces of: Limpopo (275; 36%), North West (198; 26%), Gauteng (124; 16%), Mpumalanga (106; 14%), Free State (28; 3.5%), KwaZulu-Natal (17; 2%), Western Cape (11; 1.5%), Northern Cape (7; 1%) and Eastern Cape (6; 1%) (Figure 3).

Figure 3: Geographical distribution of laboratory-confirmed measles cases in South Africa, week 40 of 2022 (ending 8 October 2022) to week 10 of 2023 (ending 4 March 2023)



The age of laboratory-confirmed measles cases ranges from two months to 60 years. The majority of cases (42%) are in the age group 5-9 years, followed by the age groups 1-4 years (25%) and 10-14 years (19%). The attack rates (per 100 000 population) are highest among age groups 1-4 years (4.7 / 100 000) and 5-9 years (6.6 / 100 000).

Out of the laboratory-confirmed cases, 80 (10%) were vaccinated with at least one dose of measles-containing vaccine (MCV), 92 (12%) were unvaccinated, and the vaccination status of 570 (79.1%) is unknown.

According to the South African National Department of Health (NDOH), national immunization coverage of the measles-containing vaccine first dose (MCV1) and second dose (MCV2) was estimated at 87% and 82% respectively in 2021, while in 2022 the respective coverage was 86% and 86%. However, historical vaccination coverage has been low, which may be contributing to the current resurgence. According to WHO-UNICEF estimates, in 2018, MCV1 coverage averaged 81% and MCV2 75%. In 2017, MCV1 and MCV2 coverage was estimated at 81% and 78%.

Epidemiology
Measles is caused by a virus in the paramyxovirus family. The virus infects the respiratory tract, then spreads throughout the body. Measles is a human disease and is not known to occur in animals. It can lead to major epidemics with significant morbidity and mortality, especially among vulnerable people. Among young and malnourished children, pregnant women and immunocompromised individuals, including those with HIV, cancer or treated with immunosuppressives, measles can cause serious complications, including ear infection, severe diarrhea, blindness, encephalitis, pneumonia, and death.

Transmission is primarily person-to-person by airborne respiratory droplets that disperse rapidly when an infected person coughs or sneezes. Transmission can also occur through direct contact with infected secretions. Transmission from asymptomatic exposed immune persons has not been demonstrated. The virus remains active and contagious in the air or on infected surfaces for up to two hours. A patient is infectious from four days before the start of the rash to four days after its appearance. There is no specific antiviral treatment for measles and most people recover within 2-3 weeks.

An effective and safe vaccine is available for prevention and control. The measles-containing vaccine first dose (MCV1) is given at the age of nine months, while the second dose of the measles-containing second dose (MCV2) is given at the age of 15 months. A 95% population coverage of MCV1 and MCV2 is required to stop measles circulation.

In areas with low vaccination coverage, epidemics typically occur every two to three years and usually last between two and three months, although their duration varies according to population size, crowding, and the population’s immunity status.

South Africa has had several outbreaks in recent years. Between 2003 and 2005, an outbreak occurred with 1676 cases reported. In 2009-2010, a large outbreak occurred with 18 431 documented cases. In 2017, a small outbreak was declared in Western Cape, Gauteng, and Kwazulu-Natal provinces, with a total of 186 cases. In 2019, a cluster of measles cases was reported in Cape Town affecting four siblings with a travel history to a measles-affected country.

Public health response
The Ministry of Health has implemented the costed national measles response plan with the support of WHO. The NDOH is conducting a mass measles vaccination campaign in all provinces, targeting children aged 6 months - 15 years. WHO staff have been deployed to support all aspects of the response: coordination; information management and surveillance; case management; supplies and logistics; and risk communication and community engagement.

Other response activities include:

Active case search, investigation and line listing of fever and rash cases;
Weekly measles incident management support team (IMST) meeting conducted with all provinces;
Weekly interim situation reports based on the results of laboratory tests being issued by the NDOH and NICD;
Deployment of provincial and district rapid response teams (RRTs) to affected neighbourhoods;
Training in preparation for the national immunization campaign, completed in all provinces;
A local vaccination campaign targeting children aged 6 months to 5 years, conducted in Limpopo province;
Training health workers on measles case identification and supportive case management to prevent measles complications and mortality
Strengthening of community-based surveillance for early detection of cases using community health volunteers, with support from WHO;
Raising community awareness via community health workers;
Mapping of partners and resources to support the outbreak response, supported by WHO and partners.
WHO risk assessment
Four of the provinces affected by the current outbreak (Limpopo, Mpumalanga, Northwest, and KwaZulu-Natal) border Zimbabwe, Botswana and Mozambique. The cross-border movement of populations across the Southern African Development Community (SADC) region2 and the weak disease surveillance health systems in many SADC countries pose a threat for further international spread.

There is an ongoing measles outbreak in neighboring Zimbabwe. Response capacities in the region are also constrained due to the concurrent readiness and response efforts to COVID-19, cholera, mpox, wild poliovirus, floods and cyclones.

Based on the currently available information, the overall risk of measles in South Africa is assessed as high for the following reasons:

The current measles outbreak has been declared in eight out of nine provinces, and cases have been confirmed in all provinces, with further spread likely due to a highly mobile population;
The 2022 measles risk assessment reported 86% of districts as having medium to high risk for measles, based on the WHO measles risk assessment tool;
Suboptimal national measles vaccination coverage (in 2022, the coverage was 86% for both MCV1 and MCV2, which is below the required coverage of 95% to achieve population herd immunity and thus prevent sustained transmission);
The presence of high rates of HIV/AIDS and TB, which can worsen the clinical picture of measles, in the South African population;
Floods reported in seven provinces, which have rendered sections of the population inaccessible during the ongoing measles vaccination campaign;
The need for technical and logistical support to provinces, as most essential services and programs (including immunization) were impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and are only now recovering from its devastating impact.
WHO advice
Although measles is highly contagious, an effective and safe vaccine is available for prevention and control. MCV1 is given at the age of 9 months in countries with both ongoing transmission and a high risk of measles mortality among infants. These countries should administer the routine MCV2 at the age of 15-18 months. However, in South Africa, MCV1 is given at 6 months and MCV2 is given at 12 months3. A 95% population coverage of MCV1 and MCV2 is required to stop measles circulation. Reaching all children with two doses of the measles vaccine is recommended to ensure immunity and prevent outbreaks, as about 15% of vaccinated children fail to develop immunity from the first dose.

Routine vaccination of children against measles, combined with mass immunization campaigns in countries with high morbidity and mortality rates, are key public health strategies to reduce burden and transmission.

There is no specific treatment for measles. Case management of measles focuses on supportive care as well as the prevention and treatment of measles complications and secondary infections. Since measles is highly contagious, patient isolation is an important intervention to prevent the further spread of the virus.

Oral rehydration salts should be used as needed to prevent dehydration. All children diagnosed with measles should receive two doses of vitamin A oral supplements, given 24 hours apart, irrespective of the timing of previous doses of vitamin A; 50 000 international units (IU) should be given to infants aged < 6 months, 100 000 IU to infants aged 6-11 months and 200 000 IU to children aged 12 months. This treatment restores low vitamin A levels in acute measles cases that occur even in well-nourished children, and can help prevent eye damage and blindness. Vitamin A supplements have also been shown to reduce the number of measles deaths.

Nutritional support is recommended to reduce the risk of malnutrition due to diarrhoea, vomiting and poor appetite associated with measles. Breastfeeding should be encouraged where appropriate.

In unimmunized or insufficiently immunized individuals, the measles vaccine may be administered within 72 hours of exposure to the measles virus to protect against disease. If the disease does subsequently develop, symptoms are usually less severe, and the duration of illness may be shortened.

WHO does not recommend any restrictions on travel or trade to or from South Africa.





Situation at a glance
On 2 January 2023, an outbreak of measles was confirmed in Nepalgunj sub-metropolitan city (SMC) in Banke district, Nepal, following a cluster of cases of fever and rash. Following the confirmation and through active case search, the index case was identified, with the onset of symptoms on 24 November 2022. Between 24 November 2022 and 10 March 2023, 690 measles cases, including one associated death (case fatality ratio: 0.14 %), have been reported from seven districts in western Nepal, and three districts in eastern Nepal (mainly in the Terai ecological region). The majority of the cases (n=591; 86%) have been reported in children aged less than 15 years. While measles is endemic in Nepal and is reported every year, the magnitude and extent of the current outbreak are unusually high compared to the previous years. Only sporadic isolated measles cases have occurred since 2004, when a substantial outbreak of over 12 000 cases was reported. The risk of spread of measles is assessed as high at the national level and moderate at regional level, due to the spread of the outbreak from Nepalgunj SMC to other districts and provinces, the detection of measles cases in a highly mobile population with frequent cross-border travel, and low population immunity of the affected districts. Response measures in affected areas have been implemented, including active case search, case management and outbreak response immunization (ORI).
Description of the situation
Between 24 November 2022 and 10 March 2023, a total of 690 measles cases, including one associated death (CFR 0.14%) have been reported from seven districts in western Nepal (Banke – 327 cases; Surkhet– 62 cases; Bardiya – 49 cases; Kailali – 39 cases; Kanchanpur – 27 cases; Bajura – 13 cases, and Dang – 12 cases), and three districts in eastern Nepal (Mahottari – 103 cases; Sunsari – 34 cases; and Morang – 24 cases) . 

The outbreak started in western Nepal in Nepalgunj SMC, Banke district, Lumbini province, after a cluster of fever and rash cases was reported on 29 December 2022. Measles was confirmed by the National Public Health Laboratory (NPHL) on 2 January 2023. Following the confirmation and active case search in Nepalgunj SMC and adjoining municipalities, the first measles case was retrospectively identified from Nepalgunj SMC with a symptom onset of 24 November 2022.

The NPHL has also detected laboratory-confirmed measles cases in eastern Nepal. The dates of the onset of the outbreaks in Mahottari, Morang, and Sunsari districts were reported as 24 December 2022, 23 December 2022, and 16 January 2023, respectively. These measles outbreaks are ongoing and adequate ORI must be undertaken to prevent spread of these outbreaks to adjoining districts . 
The present outbreak is occurring in two clusters of districts in the southern part of Nepal bordering India (Figure 2). Due to the porous international border, and measles being endemic in both Nepal and India, the country’s source of infection cannot be determined definitively without further molecular epidemiological studies.     

Figure-1: Number of measles cases (n=690) reported in Nepal between 24 November 2022 to 10 March 2023

As shown in Figure-1, the number of cases increased sharply in the last week of December but started declining in the second week of January and continues to show a declining trend. 

Figure 2: Distribution of measles cases (n= 690) reported by district in Nepal between 24 November 2022 to 10 March 2023 


Most of the cases (n=327; 47%) were reported from  Banke district, Lumbini province, which borders India. Additionally, the routine immunization outreach session sites and microplan1  were not developed with community involvement, leading to very few outreach session sites, a lack of awareness, and a large number of children who missed the vaccination.
The majority of cases (n=591; 86%) have been less than 15 years old. However, nine measles cases have also been observed in the older age group (≥ 45 years) with the maximum age of a case being 73 years.

The current outbreak occurs in a population with suboptimal population immunity, which is partly due to the disruption in routine immunization services during the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the quality of nationwide measles-rubella (MR) supplementary immunization activities conducted in 2020. Over half of the cases (58%;n=400) are unvaccinated, of these 68% (n=272) were less than four years of age. Only 31% and 28% of cases in age groups 1-4 years and 5-9 years, respectively, have received two or more doses of MR, showing susceptibility in these cohorts. According to the WHO/UNICEF estimates of national immunization coverage, in Nepal, the measles-containing vaccine first dose (MCV1) and second dose (MCV2) coverage were reported to be 90% and 87% respectively in 2021 nationally. 
Figure 3: Age distribution and vaccination status of measles cases in Nepal from 24 November 2022 to 10 March 2023



Epidemiology
Measles is a highly contagious disease caused by the measles virus. Transmission is primarily person-to-person by airborne respiratory droplets that disperse within minutes when an infected person coughs or sneezes. Transmission can also occur through direct contact with infected secretions. Transmission from asymptomatic exposed immune persons has not been demonstrated. The virus remains active and contagious in the air or on infected surfaces for up to two hours.  A patient is infectious four days before the start of the rash to four days after its appearance. The virus first infects the respiratory tract before spreading to other organs. There is no specific antiviral treatment for measles and most people recover within 2-3 weeks.

Among young and malnourished children and immunocompromised people, including those with HIV, cancer or treated with immunosuppressives, as well as pregnant women, measles can cause serious complications, including blindness, encephalitis, severe diarrhea, ear infection, pneumonia, and death.

An effective and safe vaccine is available for prevention and control. The measles-containing vaccine first dose (MCV1) is given at the age of nine months, while the second dose of the measles-containing second dose (MCV2) is given at the age of 15 months. A 95% population coverage of MCV1 and MCV2 is required to stop measles circulation.

In areas with low vaccination coverage, epidemics typically occur every two to three years and usually last between two and three months, although their duration varies according to population size, crowding, and the population’s immunity status.
Public health response
The Ministry of Health (MoH), with support from WHO, partners and non-governmental organizations (NGOs), have implemented response measures. These include:

Ongoing active case search and line listing of fever and rash cases. Vitamin A is administered to those identified with fever and rash. 
The mobilization of health personnel including health care workers (HCW), local NGOs, and technical staff from WHO, UNICEF, the District Public Health Office, and the health unit of Nepalgunj SMC to implement response measures.
The launch of non-selective ORI on 6 January 2023 by Nepalgunj SMC, targeting children aged six months to 15 years. As of 6 February, a total of 153 485 children have been vaccinated with one dose of the measles-rubella (MR) vaccine. ORI is being conducted in Nepalgunj SMC (with a target of 100% coverage) and adjoining municipalities (including Khajura, Narainapur, Duduwa, Janki, Raptisenari, Baijanath, and Kohalpur).
Ongoing non-selective ORI with the MR vaccine in Banke and Kailali districts for children aged between six months and 15 years. The government plans to expand this ORI response to other affected/high-risk districts of western Nepal.
Strengthening measles surveillance and mobilization of the district rapid response team (RRT) in Banke district.  
Ensuring an adequate stock of vaccines and logistics, as well as medicines for supportive treatment, are available at the provincial and federal governments in case of urgent need.
WHO risk assessment
While measles is endemic in Nepal and is reported every year, the magnitude and extent of the current outbreak are unusually high compared to the previous years. Only sporadic isolated measles cases have occurred since 2004, when a substantial outbreak of 12 074 cases was reported. Based on the current data and available information, the overall risk of measles at the national level is assessed as high due to the following reasons:

The outbreak initially reported in Nepalgunj SMC in Lumbini province has expanded, and cases are being reported in adjoining municipalities and provinces in western Nepal, and also eastern Nepal.
The number of cases might be higher than reported, as cases in communities are not always counted due to suboptimal surveillance activities and underreporting of identified cases.
The presence of a large number of migrants and mobile populations, making them vulnerable to measles infection:a significant number of the migrant population may not have information or access to routine immunization sites and are likely to miss routine immunization.
The outbreak occurring in an area with a porous border between India and Nepal.
Low vaccination coverage due to COVID-19 pandemic-related disruptions, which have led to an immunity gap in the population. The independent coverage survey post-measles rubella (MR) vaccination campaign in Nepal in 2020 (undertaken during the COVID-19 pandemic) shows 84% national coverage, indicating a high number of children vulnerable to measles infection.
Factors including the spread of the outbreak to neighboring districts and provinces, the detection of measles cases in a highly mobile population and minority communities, the low population immunity in affected districts, and cross-border movement, indicates the risk of intra- and inter-provincial as well as international spread of measles.

The risk at regional level is assessed to be moderate (persistent endemic transmission on both sides of a porous international border), and low at the global level.  

WHO advice
Measles is preventable by vaccination, which provides lifelong immunity in most recipients. Vaccination against measles is recommended for all susceptible children and adults for whom the vaccine is not contraindicated. National immunization programs must assure the safe provision of immunization services that can reach all children with two doses of measles vaccine. In countries with moderate to weak health systems, regular measles immunization campaigns can protect children who do not have access to routine health services. WHO recommends maintaining sustained homogeneous coverage of at least 95% with the first and second doses of the MCV vaccine and strengthening integrated epidemiological surveillance of measles and rubella in order to achieve the timely detection of all suspected cases in public, private, and social security healthcare facilities. 

It is critical to quickly recognize and treat complications of measles in order to reduce severity of the disease and mortality . Severe complications from measles can be reduced through supportive care that ensures good nutrition, adequate fluid intake and treatment of dehydration with WHO-recommended oral rehydration solution. This solution replaces fluids and other essential elements that are lost through diarrhea or vomiting. Antibiotics should be prescribed to treat eye and ear infections, and pneumonia. While there is no specific antiviral treatment for measles, prompt provision of vitamin A in therapeutic doses is recommended to reduce complications and mortality among infected children.

Healthcare workers should be vaccinated in order to avoid infections acquired in a healthcare setting.

WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions to Nepal based on the information available for this event.




Situation at a glance
On 23 February 2023, the Cambodia International Health Regulations (IHR) National Focal Point (NFP) reported one confirmed case of human infection with avian influenza A (H5N1) virus to WHO. A second case, a family contact of the first case, was reported on 24 February 2023. An outbreak investigation is ongoing including determining the exposure of these two reported cases to the virus. These are the first two cases of avian influenza A (H5N1) reported from Cambodia since 2014. In December 2003, Cambodia reported an outbreak of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) H5N1 for the first time affecting wild birds. Since then, and until 2014, human cases due to poultry-to-human transmission have been sporadically reported in Cambodia. H5N1 infection in humans can cause severe disease, has a high mortality rate, and is notifiable under IHR (2005).
Description of the situation

On 23 February 2023, the IHR NFP of Cambodia notified WHO of a confirmed case of human infection with avian influenza A (H5N1) virus. The case was an 11-year-old girl from Prey Veng province, in the south of Cambodia. On 16 February 2023, the case developed symptoms and received treatment at a local hospital. On 21 February 2023, the case was admitted to the National Pediatric Hospital with severe pneumonia. A sample was collected the same day through the severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) sentinel system and tested positive for avian influenza A (H5N1) virus by the reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) at the National Institute of Public Health on the same day. The sample was also sent to Institute Pasteur Cambodia, the National Influenza Center, which confirmed the finding. The patient died on 22 February 2023. Cambodia shared the genetic sequence data of the virus from the index case through the publicly accessible database GISAID. Virus sequencing shows the H5N1 virus belongs to clade 2.3.2.1c, and similar to the 2.3.2.1c clade viruses circulating in poultry in southeast Asia since 2014.

A total of twelve close contacts (eight asymptomatic close contacts and four symptomatic who met the suspected case definition) of the index case were identified and samples were collected and tested. Laboratory investigations confirmed the second case on 23 February 2023, the father of the index child. The father, who is asymptomatic, is in isolation at the referral hospital. The eleven other samples tested negative for A (H5N1) and SARS-CoV-2.

As of 25 February 2023, a total of 58 cases of human infection with avian influenza A (H5N1) virus have been reported in Cambodia since 2003, including 38 deaths (CFR 66%); nine cases and seven deaths between 2003 to 2009 and 47 cases and 30 deaths between 2010 to 2014 were reported. 

Public health response
A joint animal-human health investigation is underway in the province of the index case to identify the source and mode of transmission. Additionally, a high-level government response is underway to contain any further spread of the virus.  

WHO risk assessment
These are the first human infections reported in Cambodia since 2014. Human infection can cause severe disease and has a high mortality rate. Almost all Influenza A (H5N1) infection cases in people have been associated with close contact with infected live or dead birds, or Influenza A (H5N1)-contaminated environments. Based on evidence so far, the virus does not infect humans easily and spreads from person-to-person appears to be unusual. An outbreak investigation is ongoing including identifying the source of exposure of the two reported cases to the virus.

Since the virus continues to be detected in poultry populations, further human cases can be expected.

Whenever avian influenza viruses are circulating in poultry, there is a risk for sporadic infection or small clusters of human cases due to exposure to infected poultry or contaminated environments. From 2003 to 25 February 2023, a total of 873 human cases of infection with influenza A (H5N1) and 458 deaths have been reported globally from 21 countries.

Public health measures from both the human and animal health agencies have been implemented including monitoring of contacts of the laboratory-confirmed cases. While further characterization of the virus from these human cases is pending, available epidemiological and virological evidence suggest that current A(H5) viruses have not acquired the ability of sustained transmission among humans, thus the likelihood of sustained human-to-human spread is low. Based on available information so far, WHO assesses the risk to the general population posed by this virus to be low.

The risk assessment will be reviewed as needed as further epidemiological or virological information becomes available.

Vaccines against avian influenza A (H5N1) for human use have been developed for pandemic use but are not widely available. WHO, through its Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS) monitors the evolution of the virus, conducts risk assessment, and recommends the development of additional new candidate vaccine viruses for pandemic preparedness purposes.

Close analysis of the epidemiological situation, further characterization of the most recent viruses (human and poultry) and serological investigations are critical to assess associated risk and to adjust risk management measures promptly.

WHO advice
Given reports of sporadic influenza A (H5N1) cases in humans, the widespread circulation in birds and the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect and monitor virological, epidemiological, and clinical changes associated with emerging or circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal) health and timely virus sharing for risk assessment.

When avian influenza viruses are circulating in an area, people involved in high-risk tasks such as sampling sick birds, culling, and disposing of infected birds, eggs, litter and cleaning of contaminated premises should be provided with and trained in the proper use of appropriate personal protective equipment. All persons involved in these tasks should be registered and monitored closely by local health authorities for seven days following the last day of contact with infected poultry or their environments. 

In the case of a confirmed or suspected human infection caused by a novel influenza virus with pandemic potential, including a variant virus, a thorough epidemiologic investigation (even while awaiting the confirmatory laboratory results) of history of exposure to animals, of travel, and contact tracing should be conducted. The epidemiological investigation should include early identification of unusual respiratory events that could signal person-to-person transmission of the novel virus and clinical samples collected from the time and place that the case occurred should be tested and sent to a WHO Collaboration Centre for further characterization.

Currently, there is no vaccine widely available to protect against avian influenza in humans. WHO recommends that all people involved in work with poultry or birds should have a seasonal influenza vaccination to reduce the potential risk of reassortment. 

Travelers to countries with known outbreaks of animal influenza should avoid farms, contact with animals in live animal markets, entering areas where animals may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with animal faeces. General precautions include regular hand washing and good food safety and food hygiene practices. Should infected individuals from affected areas travel internationally, their infection may be detected in another country during travel or after arrival. If this were to occur, further community-level spread is considered unlikely as on the basis of available information, this virus has not acquired the ability to transmit easily among humans.

WHO advises against the application of any travel or trade restrictions based on the current information available on this event. WHO does not advise special traveler screening at points of entry or restrictions with regard to the current situation of influenza viruses at the human-animal interface.

All human infections caused by a novel influenza subtype are notifiable under the International Health Regulations (IHR) and State Parties to the IHR (2005) are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a recent human infection caused by an influenza A virus with the potential to cause a pandemic. Evidence of illness is not required for this report. 






On 7 February 2023, the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare of Equatorial Guinea reported the deaths of a number of individuals with suspected hemorrhagic fever. On 12 February 2023, one sample was confirmed positive for Marburg virus by real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), at the Institute Pasteur in Dakar, Senegal. Investigations are ongoing to find additional cases. WHO is supporting the response by strengthening contact tracing, case management, infection prevention and control, laboratory, risk communication and community engagement. WHO assesses the risk posed by the outbreak as high at the national level, moderate at the regional level and low at the global level.
Description of the situation

This is the first Marburg virus disease (MVD) outbreak reported in Equatorial Guinea.

On 7 February 2023, the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare of Equatorial Guinea reported at least eight deaths that occurred between 7 January and 7 February 2023, in two villages located in the district of Nsock Nsomo, eastern province of Kie-Ntem, Río Muni Region. According to the ongoing epidemiological investigation, the cases presented with fever, followed by weakness, vomiting, and blood-stained diarrhoea; two cases also presented with skin lesions and otorrhagia (bleeding from the ear).

On 9 February 2023, eight blood samples were collected from contacts and sent to the Centre Interdisciplinaire de Recherches Médicales de Franceville (CIRMF) in Gabon, where they tested negative for both Ebola and Marburg viruses by real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).

An additional eight blood samples were collected from other contacts and sent to the Institute Pasteur in Dakar, Senegal, on 12 February 2023. One of these samples was taken from a suspected case that was confirmed positive for Marburg virus by RT-PCR. This case presented with fever, non-bloody vomiting, bloody diarrhoea, and convulsions and died on 10 February 2023 at Ebebiyin District Hospital. The case also had epidemiological links to four deceased cases from one of the villages in Nsoc-Nsomo district.

As of 21 February 2023, the cumulative number of cases is nine, including one confirmed case, four probable cases and four suspected cases. All the cases have died, one in a health facility and the other eight in the community. There are no cases among healthcare workers. Thirty-four contacts are currently under follow-up.

Epidemiology
Marburg virus is the causative agent of Marburg virus disease (MVD), which has a case-fatality ratio of up to 88%. Marburg virus disease was initially detected in 1967 after simultaneous outbreaks in Marburg and Frankfurt in Germany, and in Belgrade, Serbia.

Rousettus aegyptiacus fruit bats are considered natural hosts for Marburg virus, from which the virus is then transmitted to people.

Marburg spreads through human-to-human transmission via direct contact (through broken skin or mucous membranes) with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected people, and with surfaces and materials (e.g. bedding, clothing) contaminated with these fluids. Healthcare workers have previously been infected while treating patients with suspected or confirmed MVD. Burial ceremonies that involve direct contact with the body of the deceased can also contribute to the transmission of Marburg.

The incubation period varies from two to 21 days. Illness caused by Marburg virus begins abruptly, with high fever, severe headache and severe malaise. Severe watery diarrhoea, abdominal pain and cramping, nausea and vomiting can begin on the third day. Severe haemorrhagic manifestations appear between five and seven days from symptoms onset, and fatal cases usually have some form of bleeding, often from multiple areas. In fatal cases, death occurs most often between eight and nine days after symptom onset, usually preceded by severe blood loss and shock.

In the early course of the disease, the clinical diagnosis of MVD is difficult to distinguish from many other tropical febrile illnesses due to the similarities in the clinical symptoms. Other viral haemorrhagic fevers need to be excluded, including Ebola virus disease, as well as malaria, typhoid fever, leptospirosis, rickettsial infections, and plague. Laboratory confirmation can be made by different tests, such as antibody-capture enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), antigen-capture detection tests, serum neutralization test, reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay, electron microscopy, and virus isolation by cell culture. 

Although no vaccines or antiviral treatments are approved to treat the virus, supportive care – rehydration with oral or intravenous fluids – and treatment of specific symptoms improve survival. A range of potential treatments are being evaluated, including blood products, immune therapies, and drug therapies.

This is the first time that Equatorial Guinea has reported an outbreak of MVD. The most recently reported outbreak of MVD was in Ghana in 2022 (three confirmed cases). Other MVD outbreaks have been previously reported in Guinea (2021), Uganda (2017, 2014, 2012, 2007), Angola (2004-2005), the Democratic Republic of the Congo (1998 and 2000), Kenya (1990, 1987, 1980) and South Africa (1975).

Public health response
In-depth epidemiological investigations are underway to determine the source of the outbreak.
National teams have been deployed to the affected districts for active case finding, contact tracing, isolating and providing medical care to cases.
WHO has deployed experts in epidemiology, case management, infection prevention, laboratory and risk communication to support national response efforts and ensure community engagement.
WHO is also facilitating the shipment of tents, materials for sample collection and analysis, and a viral haemorrhagic fever kit including personal protective equipment for 500 health workers.
WHO is supporting the transportation of samples to laboratories in Senegal and Gabon as plans are underway to set up laboratory facilities in-country.
WHO risk assessment
Equatorial Guinea is facing an outbreak of MVD for the first time and the country's capacity to manage the outbreak is insufficient.

Based on available information, all nine deceased cases were in contact with a relative with the same symptoms or participated in a burial of a person with symptoms compatible with MVD. At this stage it cannot be ruled out that all MVD cases have been identified, therefore there could be transmission chains that have not been tracked. To date, most of the contacts of the nine deceased cases have not been identified.

It should also be noted that with the exception of one case who died in a health facility, the other eight died in the community and their burial conditions are unknown.

Cross-border population movements are frequent, and the borders are very porous, between Ebebiyin and Nsock Nsomo districts (Equatorial Guinea), Cameroon and Gabon. This constitutes a risk of cross-border spread.

Considering the above described scenario, the risk is considered high at the national level, moderate at the regional level and low at the global level.

WHO advice
Marburg virus disease outbreak control relies on using a range of interventions, namely case management, surveillance including contact tracing, a good laboratory service, infection prevention and control including safe and dignified burials, and social mobilization. Community engagement is key to successfully controlling MVD outbreaks. Raising awareness of risk factors for Marburg infection and protective measures that individuals can take is an effective way to reduce human transmission.

Communities affected by Marburg should make efforts to ensure that the population is well informed, both about the nature of the disease itself and about necessary outbreak containment measures.

Outbreak containment measures include prompt, safe and dignified burial of the deceased cases, identifying people who may have been in contact with someone infected with Marburg and monitoring their health for 21 days, isolating and providing care to confirmed patients and maintaining good hygiene and a clean environment.

Healthcare workers caring for patients with or suspected of MVD should apply additional infection control measures in addition to standard precautions to avoid contact with patients’ blood and body fluids and with surfaces and objects contaminated.

WHO recommends that male survivors of MVD practice safer sex and hygiene for 12 months from onset of symptoms or until their semen twice tests negative for Marburg virus. Contact with body fluids should be avoided and washing with soap and water is recommended. WHO does not recommend isolation of male or female convalescent patients whose blood has tested negative for Marburg virus.

WHO advises against any restrictions on travel and/or trade to Equatorial Guinea based on available information for the current outbreak.






Situation at a glance
In Mozambique, an outbreak of cholera has been growing exponentially since December 2022 with geographic spread to new districts. Heavy rainfall in the first weeks of February threatens to further worsen the situation. The first case of cholera in the current outbreak was reported to the Ministry of Health and WHO from Lago district in Niassa province on 14 September 2022. As of 19 February 2023, a cumulative total of 5237 suspected cases and 37 deaths (Case Fatality Ratio (CFR) 0.7%) have been reported in 29 districts from six out of 11 provinces in the country. Of the at least 182 cases tested, 99 cases (54%) were laboratory confirmed for cholera by culture. All six provinces currently affected by cholera are flood-prone areas. As the rainy season continues, it is anticipated that more districts will be affected. With this outbreak, cholera has affected many districts that had not reported any cases in over five years and where, as a result, the response capacity is limited. In addition, there is inadequate access to sources of safe drinking water for the population that is already challenged with poor hygiene and sanitation. Mozambique is one of many countries in the region facing a cholera outbreak at the moment. Notably, neighbouring Malawi is facing the deadliest cholera outbreak in its history. Considering the frequency of cross-border movement and the history of cross-border spread of cholera during this outbreak, WHO considers the risk of further disease spread as very high at the national and regional levels.
Description of the situation

The first case of cholera in the current outbreak was reported to the Ministry of Health and WHO from Lago district in Niassa province on 14 September 2022.  

As of 19 February 2023, a cumulative total of 5237 suspected cases and 37 deaths (CFR 0.7%) have been reported in 29 districts from six of 11 provinces in the country. Of at least 182 cases tested, 99 cases (54%) were laboratory confirmed for cholera due to the identification of Vibrio cholerae Ogawa by culture. As of 19 February, eight districts (Chimbonila, Lago, Lichinga, Mandimba, Mecanhelas, Muembe, Ngauma and Sanga) of Niassa province (north of the country) reported 2525 cases and 16 deaths (CFR 0.6 %).  In the central region of the country, nine districts (Beira, Buzi, Caia, Cheringoma, Chibabava, Gorongoza, Maringue, Marromeu, Muanza) of Sofala province reported 1354 cases and three deaths (CFR 0.2 %). Nine districts (Angonia, Cahora Bassa, Chiuta, Doa, Marara, Moatize, Mutarara, Tete, Tsangano) from Tete province, reported 1271 cases with 12 deaths (CFR 0.9%) since December 2022. Zambezia province (Milange district) bordering Malawi reported 14 cases. In the southern region of the country, one district (Xai-Xai) in Gaza province, reported 42 cases and four deaths (CFR 9.5%).  In addition, one district (Tambara) in Manica province, reported 34 cases and two deaths (CFR 5.9%).

Additionally, four districts from three provinces (Tete – two, Zambezia – one, and Cabo-Delgado – one) have reported cases of Acute Watery Diarrhoea (AWD) that were positive for cholera by Rapid Diagnostic Test (RDT) with culture results pending. Notably, in the last 30 days the districts reporting cholera and AWD are increasing, with three new provinces reporting confirmed cholera. 

Prior to the current outbreak, there were cholera outbreaks in eight districts in three provinces during the first half of 2022, which were declared over. The current outbreak of cholera in Mozambique covers a wider geographic area and has a higher CFR compared with the previous outbreak. Moreover, most of the affected districts, especially in Niassa province, had not reported cholera cases for more than five years and many of the health professionals do not have experience in responding to a cholera outbreak. Weak surveillance with late reporting, inadequate WASH conditions (lack of access to safe drinking water, poor sanitation and hygiene practices), a weak health system and exhausted workforce responding to multiple emergencies pose a threat to continued disease progression, as do the ongoing heavy rains of the season.

Figure 1. Cholera cases reported by week and province in Mozambique from 14 September 2022 to 19 February 2023* * The 14 cases from Zambezia district are not indicated figure 1

Figure 2. The cumulative number of cholera cases per 100 000 population in Mozambique by reporting districts as of 19 February 2023 



Epidemiology
Cholera is an acute enteric infection caused by ingesting the bacteria Vibrio cholerae present in contaminated water or food. It is mainly linked to insufficient access to safe drinking water and inadequate sanitation. It is an extremely virulent disease that can cause severe acute watery diarrhoea resulting in high morbidity and mortality, and can spread rapidly, depending on the frequency of exposure, the exposed population and the setting. Cholera affects both children and adults and can be fatal if untreated.

The incubation period is between 12 hours and five days after ingestion of contaminated food or water. Most people infected with V. cholerae do not develop any symptoms, although the bacteria are present in their faeces for 1-10 days after infection and are shed back into the environment, potentially infecting other people. The majority of people who develop symptoms have mild or moderate symptoms, while a minority develop acute watery diarrhoea and vomiting with severe dehydration. Cholera is an easily treatable disease. Most people can be treated successfully through prompt administration of Oral Rehydration Solution (ORS).

The consequences of a humanitarian crisis or disasters like flooding– such as disruption of water and sanitation systems, or the displacement of populations towards inadequate and overcrowded camps – can increase the risk of cholera transmission, should the bacteria be present or introduced.

A multisectoral approach including a combination of surveillance, water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH), social mobilization, treatment, and oral cholera vaccines is essential to control cholera outbreaks and to reduce deaths.

Public health response
Since the outbreak was declared in September 2022, a national cholera task force was activated and WHO, along with other partners, is supporting the response. Specific actions undertaken include:

Coordination:

The national cholera task force was activated with the involvement of the different working groups and cooperation partners, and weekly meetings are held.
Health Cluster meetings on the cholera outbreak to discuss partner support are ongoing. Health and WASH clusters are maintaining a 4W (Who, What, Where and When) matrix to map partners interventions, gaps, needs and response for each affected district.
Multisectoral coordination meetings are held weekly at district level and daily at provincial level. Cross-border coordination mechanisms are in place. Three cross-border meetings with Malawi have so far been conducted.
Epidemiological surveillance and laboratory:

Case detection continues at the community and health facility level. The National Rapid Response Teams (RRT) was established in each district continue to investigate the cases. Data collection is being done daily and a daily bulletin is being produced.
Rapid test kits were allocated to priority districts. Testing of suspected cases is being carried out with support from the National Institute of Health.
Case management:

RRT are available and deployed in affected states.
Training in case management was conducted for all 16 districts in Niassa province.
WHO has provided six tents, cholera kits (central, periphery, community), Intravenous (IV) cannulas, cholera RDT kits and other consumables.
Cholera treatment centers and cholera treatment units were set up in affected districts.
Infection Prevention and Control (IPC)/Water, Hygiene and Sanitation (WASH):

Additional surge staff deployment to strengthen surveillance, Infection Prevention and Control (IPC), case management and logistics is underway.
Advocacy was conducted with the other partners supporting WASH functions. UNICEF and MSF have allocated water purifiers (CERTEZA), chlorine and bleach.
Support visits on IPC and WASH in cholera treatment centres have been conducted.
Risk communication and community engagement:

Messages on cholera prevention and control have been translated into local languages and distributed door-to-door and in market places.
Risk communication and community mobilization sessions are taking place in the communities.
Vaccination:

A request for approximately 700 000 doses of Oral Cholera Vaccine (OCV) was approved by the International Coordinating Group (ICG) on Vaccine Provision and a vaccination campaign in affected districts in Gaza, Niassa, Sofala and Zambezia provinces is in preparation and will start on 27 February 2023.
WHO risk assessment
Cholera is endemic in Mozambique and cholera outbreaks have been reported in the country every year during the hot and rainy season (October to April), mainly from Nampula, Cabo Delgado, Sofala and Tete provinces. However, the current outbreak has greater geographical extent than outbreaks reported in 2019-2022, when no more than three provinces were affected during the year.  

The first cholera case of the current outbreak was reported from Lago district on 14 September 2022, Niassa province, located in the northern region of the country, which shares a border with Malawi and Tanzania.

All six provinces currently affected by cholera are located in the Zambezia Valley, which is a flood-prone area. As the rainy season continues, it is anticipated that more districts will be affected. The rainy season lasts until March-April, usually with a peak of rainfall recorded in January and early February. Heavy rainfall has already been reported in seven out of eleven provinces in the first weeks of February (31 January to 9 February), with flooding in Maputo province leading to displacement and disruption of the water supply system. There is inadequate access to safe drinking water sources for the population that is already challenged with poor hygiene and sanitation and the current rainy season could contribute to sustained disease transmission. 

Several affected provinces, such as Niassa, Tete and Zambezia, are bordering Malawi, which is currently facing its deadliest cholera outbreak in history. The borders with Malawi are porous with frequent movement across the border between the two countries.

On 26 January 2023, Zambia notified WHO of a cholera outbreak in its Eastern Province bordering Malawi and Mozambique, where one of the two index cases had just returned from Mozambique. There remains a high risk of spread to other countries in the region, including Tanzania and Zimbabwe and further to South Africa. Considering the history of cross-border spread of cholera during this outbreak, the risk of further disease spread is therefore considered very high at the national and regional levels. 

WHO advice
A multi-pronged approach is essential to combat cholera and reduce mortality. The measures used combine surveillance, improvement of water supply, sanitation and hygiene, risk communication and community engagement, treatment of the disease and use of oral cholera vaccines. Countries affected by cholera are advised to strengthen disease surveillance and national preparedness to rapidly detect and respond to possible outbreaks.

WHO recommends improving access to proper and timely case management of cholera cases, improving access to safe drinking water and sanitation infrastructure, as well as improving infection prevention and control in healthcare facilities.

Promotion of preventive hygiene practices and food safety in affected communities are the most effective means of controlling cholera. Targeted public health risk communication messages are a key element for a successful response.  Promoting hand hygiene, use of toilets and food safety are effective means of preventing cholera. Serious symptoms and deaths can be prevented by ensuring communities understand the importance of ensuring people with cholera symptoms are well hydrated using oral rehydration solution and rapidly seeking care. Socio-behavioural data should be collected to understand community knowledge, risk perception, levels of trust, rumours and misinformation, behaviours, attitudes and practices; this data should be used to drive risk communication and community engagement activities and to inform those of other response pillars. Feedback systems should be established to enable those affected by the outbreak and response efforts to have two way communication with responders, with regular responses to their feedback to maintain trust.

Measures aimed at improving environmental conditions include applying long-term sustainable solutions for safe water supply, sanitation and hygiene in cholera-prone areas. Communities should be proactively engaged in the planning and implementation of these solutions. In addition to cholera, these interventions can also prevent a wide range of other water-borne diseases and contribute to achieving goals in education and the fight against poverty and malnutrition. Solutions for safe water supply, sanitation and hygiene related to cholera are in line with the Sustainable Development Goals.

Rapid access to treatment is essential during a cholera outbreak. Oral rehydration solution should be available in communities and not just in larger health centers that can offer intravenous infusions and management at any time. Where these are not easily available, communities should be informed of how to make the solution at home and of the importance of keeping hydration high while seeking care for people with cholera. With rapid and appropriate care, the case fatality rate should remain below 1%.

The OCV should be used in conjunction with improvements in water and sanitation to control cholera outbreaks and for prevention in targeted areas known to be at high risk for cholera. Risk communication and community engagement activities should be conducted to manage vaccine demand and raise awareness of vaccination campaigns. If a single dose schedule is being used, communication is needed to inform communities of why the dose schedule has changed and to share information on safety and efficacy.

WHO recommends Member States to strengthen and maintain surveillance for cholera, especially at the community level, for the early detection of suspected cases and to provide adequate treatment and prevent its spread.

As this outbreak is occurring in border areas where there is significant cross-border movement, WHO encourages the countries concerned to ensure cooperation and regular information sharing. 

WHO does not recommend any restrictions on travel and trade to and from Mozambique. 



Situation at a glance
Nipah virus infection outbreaks are seasonal in Bangladesh, with cases usually occurring annually between December and May. Since the report of the first case in 2001, the number of yearly cases has ranged from zero to 67, though in the last five years, reported cases have been comparatively lower ranging from zero in 2016 to eight in 2019. However, since 4 January 2023 and as of 13 February 2023, 11 cases (10 confirmed and one probable) including eight deaths (Case Fatality Rate (CFR) 73%) have been reported across two divisions in Bangladesh. A multisectoral response has been implemented by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Bangladesh, including strengthened surveillance activities, case management, infection prevention and control, and implementation of risk communication campaigns. WHO assesses the risk as high at the national level, moderate at the regional level, and low at the global level.
Description of the situation
Since 2001, Bangladesh has been reporting seasonal outbreaks of Nipah virus infection between December and May, corresponding with the harvesting season of date palm sap (DPS) occurring in the country from November to March. Reported cases ranged from zero (in 2002, 2006 and 2016) to 67 (in 2004). A lower number of reported cases was observed from 2016 following an extensive advocacy campaign against the consumption of raw date palm sap (Figure 1).

However, between 4 January to 13 February 2023, a total of 11 (ten confirmed and one probable) cases of Nipah virus infection including eight deaths (CFR 73%) were reported from seven districts across two divisions in Bangladesh. This is the highest number of cases since 2015 when 15 cases including 11 deaths were reported.

Ten of the 11 reported cases were laboratory confirmed, while samples could not be collected from one case before death and is therefore considered a probable case based on epidemiological linkage. Laboratory confirmation of Nipah virus infection was carried out through Real Time Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR) using samples from throat swabs and antibody detection via enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Confirmatory tests were done at the Institute of Epidemiology, Disease Control and Research (IEDCR) and International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease Research, Bangladesh, (ICDDR, B) laboratories.

Six cases were reported from Dhaka Division including four deaths from the districts of Narsingdi (one case who died), Rajbari (four cases including three deaths) and Shariatpur (one case). Rajshahi Division reported five cases including four deaths from the districts of Naogaon (two cases including one death), Natore (one case who died), Pabna (one case who died), and Rajshahi (one case who died) (Figure 2).

Figure 1. Number of reported Nipah virus cases and deaths by year, 1 January 2001 – 13 February 2023, Bangladesh. 

Figure 2. Distribution of Nipah Virus cases and surveillance sites (2001 – 2023) [Left] and Nipah cases in 2023 [Right]. 

Of the eleven cases reported, four were females and seven were males. The median age of cases is 16 years old, ranging from 15 days to 50 years. Of the 11 cases, ten had a history of consuming date palm sap while one case, a 15-day old infant is considered a secondary case.

Estimated incubation period of these cases ranged from 3 to 15 days with a median of 14 days. All of the 11 cases were hospitalized following the onset of symptoms.

A total of 310 contacts have been identified around the 11 cases and are monitored for 3 weeks from the last date of possible exposure.

Epidemiology
Nipah virus infection is an emerging bat-borne zoonotic disease transmitted to humans through infected animals or contaminated food. It can also be transmitted directly from person to person through close contact with an infected person. Fruit bats or flying foxes (Pteropus species) are the natural hosts for Nipah virus.

The incubation period is believed to range from 4 to 14 days. However, an incubation period up to 45 days has been reported. Laboratory diagnosis of a patient with a clinical history of Nipah virus infection can be made during the acute and convalescent phases of the disease by using a combination of tests. The main tests used are RT-PCR from bodily fluids and antibody detection via ELISA.

Nipah virus infection in humans causes a range of clinical presentations, from asymptomatic infection (subclinical) to acute respiratory infection and fatal encephalitis. Infected people initially develop symptoms including fever, headaches, myalgia (muscle pain), vomiting, and sore throat. This can be followed by dizziness, drowsiness, altered consciousness, and neurological signs that indicate acute encephalitis. Some people can also experience atypical pneumonia and severe respiratory problems, including acute respiratory distress. Encephalitis and seizures occur in severe cases, progressing to coma within 24 to 48 hours. Most people who survive acute encephalitis make a full recovery, but long-term neurologic conditions have been reported in survivors. Approximately 20% of patients are left with residual neurological consequences such as seizure disorder and personality changes. A small number of people who recover subsequently relapse or develop delayed onset encephalitis.

The overall global case fatality rate is estimated at 40% to 75% depending on local capabilities for epidemiological surveillance and clinical management. Although antivirals are in development, there are no licensed vaccines or therapeutics available for the prevention or treatment of Nipah virus infection.

Public health response
The following public health response has been implemented by the government of Bangladesh.

Coordination:

The Communicable Disease Control unit and the Directorate General of Health Services (CDC-DGHS) held an emergency meeting on 28 January 2023 with all Divisional Directors, Civil Surgeons, Health and Family Planning Officers, and other public health experts to discuss and strategize the response to the outbreak.
Surveillance:

Outbreak investigation including contact tracing is ongoing by the National Rapid Response Team (NRRT) in collaboration with ICDDR, B.
CDC-DGHS, IEDCR, the Health Education Bureau, ICDDR, B, and WHO, are focusing on strengthening the existing surveillance system; formulating strategy for immediate interventions; and information, education, and communication (IEC) content for advocacy and awareness.
Case Management:

CDC-DGHS and the Dhaka Medical College Hospital’s senior clinicians are strengthening case management. COVID-19-designated Intensive Care Unit (ICU) beds in the hospital were repurposed temporarily for Nipah virus infection case management.
The infectious disease hospital (IDH) in Dhaka has been designated to support the quarantine and isolation of suspected Nipah virus infected cases.
Infection Prevention and Control:

Health care workers across all levels are instructed to observe optimal infection, prevention and control including wearing masks and gloves, investigating, and managing cases locally, and not referring cases to Dhaka for management except when necessary.
The National Guideline for Management, Prevention, and Control of Nipah Virus Infection is being reviewed and updated, focusing on safety measures for healthcare workers and infection, prevention, and control (IPC).
Risk Communication and Community Engagement:

Advocacy, risk communication and community engagement activities (RCCE) are ongoing.
Two hotline numbers have been activated for Nipah, one at IEDCR and the other at ICDDR, B, with the aim to collect formal and informal reporting of Nipah cases and also to meet the general queries of the public about Nipah and other infectious diseases.
WHO risk assessment
The overall risk is assessed by WHO as high at the national level due to the following reasons:

Although Nipah virus cases are reported in Bangladesh almost every year, 11 cases and eight deaths, have already been reported in 2023, which is unusual compared to the past seven years.
The case fatality rate from Nipah virus infection is high (73%). Initial signs and symptoms of Nipah virus infection are non-specific, and the diagnosis is often not suspected at the time of presentation. This can hinder accurate diagnosis and creates challenges in outbreak detection, effective and timely infection control measures, and outbreak response activities.
There are currently no specific drugs or vaccines available for Nipah virus infection although WHO has identified Nipah as a priority disease for the WHO Research and Development Blueprint.  Intensive supportive care is recommended to treat severe respiratory and neurologic complications.
Currently, the level of awareness among the general population is still low, despite ongoing efforts for risk communication and community engagement.
There has already been one case of suspected human-to-human transmission during the current outbreak and secondary cases have previously been reported in Bangladesh.
Fruit bats or flying foxes (Pteropus species.), the natural reservoir of Nipah virus, is present in Bangladesh and the genetic diversity of Nipah virus isolated from affected persons in Bangladesh suggest substantial diversity of the virus in the wildlife reservoir and repeated spill over of the virus from its reservoir to the human population.
The risk at the regional level is moderate as Rajshahi district borders India. Although there have not been any instances of cross-border transmission by humans previously, this risk remains given the shared ecological corridor for the virus’s natural host (fruit bats or flying foxes) and occurrence among domestic animals and humans previously in both countries. India also has experienced previous outbreaks of Nipah virus infection.

The risk assessed at the global level is low considering the absence of natural hosts in many countries and the fact that there have been no previous cases outside Bangladesh, India, Malaysia, and Singapore.

WHO advice
In the absence of a vaccine or licensed treatment available for Nipah virus infection, the only way to reduce or prevent infection in people is by raising awareness of the risk factors and educating about the measures persons can take to reduce exposure to the Nipah virus. Case management should focus on the delivery of supportive care measures to patients. Intensive supportive care is recommended to treat severe respiratory and neurologic complications.

Public health educational messages should focus on:

Reducing the risk of bat-to-human transmission: Efforts to prevent transmission should first focus on decreasing bat access to date palm sap and other fresh food products. Freshly collected date palm juice should be boiled, and fruits should be thoroughly washed and peeled before consumption. Fruits with signs of bat bites should be discarded. Areas where bats are known to roost should be avoided. The risk of international transmission via fruit or fruit products (such as raw date palm juice) contaminated with urine or saliva from infected fruit bats can be prevented by washing them thoroughly and peeling them before consumption.

Reducing the risk of animal-to-human transmission: Natural infection in domestic animals has been described in farming pigs, horses, goats, sheep, but also in dogs and cats. Gloves and other protective clothing should be worn while handling sick animals or their tissues, and during slaughtering and culling procedures. As much as possible, people should avoid being in contact with infected pigs. In endemic areas, when establishing new pig farms, considerations should be given to the presence of fruit bats in the area and in general, pig feed and pig sheds should be protected against bats when feasible. Samples taken from animals with suspected Nipah virus infection should be handled by trained staff working in suitably equipped laboratories. Nipah virus infection can be prevented by avoiding exposure to bats and sick animals in endemic areas, and by avoiding consuming fruits partially eaten by infected bats or drinking raw date palm sap/toddy/juice.

Reducing the risk of human-to-human transmission: Close unprotected physical contact with Nipah virus-infected people should be avoided. Regular hand washing should be carried out after caring for or visiting sick people. Health care workers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed infection, or handling their specimens, should implement standard infection control precautions at all times. As human-to-human transmission has been reported among caregivers including family members and in health-care settings, contact and droplet precautions should be used in addition to standard precautions. Airborne precautions may be required in certain circumstances.







Description of the situation
Global overview

Current Situation                                                                            

Since the first disease outbreak news on the global cholera situation was published on 16 December 2022, the global situation has further deteriorated with additional countries reporting cases and outbreaks.

Since mid-2021, the world is facing an acute upsurge of the 7th cholera pandemic characterized by the number, size and concurrence of multiple outbreaks, the spread to areas free of cholera for decades and alarming high mortality rates.

In 2021, 23 countries reported cholera outbreaks, mainly in the WHO Regions of Africa and the Eastern Mediterranean. This trend continued into 2022 as 30 countries across five of the six WHO regions reported cholera cases or outbreaks. Among those, 14 had not reported cholera in 2021, including non-endemic countries (Lebanon and Syria)i,ii or countries that had not reported cases over three years (Haiti and the Dominican Republic), while most of the remaining countries reported higher case numbers and case fatality ratios (CFR) than in previous years.

As of 1 February 2023, at least 18 countries continue to report cholera cases (Table 1 A & B). As according to the seasonality patterns large parts of the world are in currently in low or interepidemic transmission period this number could increase in the months to come.

The mortality associated to those outbreaks is of particular concern as many countries reported higher CFR than in previous years. The average cholera CFR reported globally in 2021 was 1.9% (2.9% in Africa), a significant increase above acceptable (<1%) and the highest recorded in over a decade. Preliminary data suggests similar trend for 2022 and 2023.  

The potential drivers of the outbreaks and challenges impacting response activities were highlighted in the last Disease Outbreak News. The simultaneous progression of several cholera outbreaks, compounded in countries facing complex humanitarian crises with fragile health systems and aggravated by climate change, poses challenges to outbreak response and risks further spreading to other countries.

The overall capacity to respond to the multiple and simultaneous outbreaks continues to be strained due to the global lack of resources, including the oral cholera vaccine, as well as overstretched public health and medical personnel, who are dealing with multiple disease outbreaks at the same time.

Based on the current situation, including the increasing number of outbreaks and their geographic expansion, as well as a lack of vaccines and other resources, WHO assesses the risk at the global level as very high.

Figure-1: Global situation of active epidemics of cholera and acute watery diarrhoea as of 1 February 2023

Note: Countries in white are not reporting ongoing cholera outbreaks as of 1 February 2023. 

Figure-2: Cholera cases* reported to WHO by year and continent, global CFR, 1989-2021**



* In 2017 and 2019, Yemen accounted for 84% and 93% of all cholera cases respectively (Weekly Epidemiological Report 2018, 2020).

**The data for 2022 is not included in the epidemic curve due to (i) incompleteness  (ii) provisional estimates. Official reporting of case counts per country to WHO is expected at the end of the year and remains to be consolidated for the annual report.

To note: data on cholera are often incomplete and underreporting is common. Several countries do not have reporting systems for cholera. This is why complete lists of countries with outbreaks, and accurate case and death counts cannot be provided.

Regional overview
In the table below, countries under monitoring are described. These include countries with active outbreaks of cholera and those which reported outbreaks in 2022. Other factors including the length of the outbreak, the size of vulnerable populations, and the overall contextual challenges are also taken into consideration.

WHO Region of Africa: The ongoing conflict in the province of North Kivu in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) led to an increased influx of internally displaced people (IDPs) to camps close to Goma, during the last months of 2022. The lack of access to water and sanitation in the camps fueled the ongoing cholera outbreak. Additionally, the rainy season is worsening the cholera situation in other eastern provinces, increasing the risk of regional spread. Burundi recently declared a cholera outbreak in the city of Bujumbura, along the shores of Lake Tanganyika and near the border with the province of South Kivu in DRC. While the number of reported cases in some countries with widespread outbreaks in 2022, such as Cameroon and Nigeria, is currently declining, the situation in Malawi continues to deteriorate in early 2023 as it reports over 600 new cases per day. The country is experiencing its deadliest cholera outbreak in history with a continually high CFR (>3%) since March 2022. In addition, neighbouring Mozambique has registered a sharp increase in cases and alerts since mid-December 2022, with cases reported from five provinces, including provinces bordering Malawi.

On 26 January 2023, Zambia notified WHO of a cholera outbreak in the Eastern province bordering Malawi and Mozambique. There remains a high risk of spread to other countries in the region, including Tanzania and Zimbabwe. Additionally, three countries in the Horn of Africa (Ethiopia, Kenya, and Somalia in the Eastern Mediterranean Region) are reporting ongoing cholera outbreaks. The continued drought is driving population movements which increase the risk of spread of cholera, and high levels of malnutrition, which increase the risk of severe outcomes of cholera in the region. There are multiple graded emergencies and stretched resource and human capacity due to other public health emergencies (COVID-19, mpox, malnutrition). Many affected areas are highly insecure and there is limited access to the population, which has limited access to healthcare. Climate change is leading to drought in some areas in Africa, and floods in others, resulting in increased population displacement and reduced access to clean water. High CFRs were reported from multiple outbreaks. There is high risk of regional spread in both Southern Africa with the rainy/cyclone season approaching and in the Lake Chad basin where there is limited response capacity due to insecurity.

WHO Region of the Americas: The situation in Haiti’s Ouest Department (which includes the metropolitan area of Port-au-Prince) is stabilizing. The department reported a third of the confirmed cases reported during the October-November 2022 peak. However, the outbreak is not yet under control and suspected and confirmed cases of cholera continue to be reported in all ten departments of the country. In addition, imported cases and limited local transmission are being reported from Santo Domingo, the capital of neighbouring Dominican Republic.

The mobility of the local population – although restricted because of the severe insecurity in the country and lack of fuel – represents a continued risk of national and international spread. Additional exportations from Haiti to other countries and territories in the Region of the Americas are possible. According to the 2 December 2022 AMRO rapid risk assessment the risk in Hispaniola is evaluated as Very High and the regional risk is assessed as Moderate. Efforts are ongoing to improve surveillance and laboratory capacity in the region. A cholera vaccination campaign is underway on Hispaniola Island.

WHO Eastern Mediterranean Region: Weak surveillance systems (e.g. sentinel, hospital-based surveillance) in many countries of the region make the interpretation of data challenging. The region is characterized by stretched staff capacity due to complex humanitarian crises, and emigration of trained staff.  The outbreaks in the region are spreading, with population movement exacerbated by conflict, climate change, droughts, and flooding. In 2022, the first cholera outbreak in over 10 years was reported in Lebanon and Syria, while Pakistan recorded its largest outbreak in decades.  Cases in Afghanistan, Lebanon, Pakistan and Somalia are currently declining, and other countries in the region which reported outbreaks in 2022, such as Iraq and IR Iran, remain under monitoring.  The widespread outbreak continues in parts of Syrian Arab Republic, and risk of further spread to other countries in the region and beyond persist.

WHO European Region: Cholera is not endemic in the WHO European Region. Current robust public health systems, including access to adequate hygiene and sanitation standards at community and healthcare facilities coupled with surveillance and response capacities, lower the risk of further transmission following importation. However, countries bordering Syria and Lebanon, where large ongoing outbreaks are reported, may have a heightened risk of introduction and onward transmission in particular settings e.g., amongst refugee and displaced persons (Türkiye). A heightened risk of cholera outbreaks in Türkiye should be anticipated given the recent large earthquake that struck the southern and central parts of the country on 6 February 2023, and has had a devastating impact on infrastructure. In addition, in November 2022, Israel reported to WHO the detection of toxigenic Vibrio cholerae O1 in environmental samples from the Yarmuch stream upon its entry into Israel. Israel has taken substantive proactive measures to prevent cholera introduction and transmission and, as a result, the overall risk is considered low. The ongoing war in Ukraine stands to further worsen environmental and sanitary conditions and weaken health infrastructure in this area, however, cholera occurrence is of lower risk during winter months.

In November of 2022, WHO European Region IHR invited Member States to report any imported or autochthonous case of cholera on an ad hoc basis to support global outbreak monitoring.  As of 27 December 2022, 28 cases of cholera have been reported to WHO by eight European Region Member States, of which 24 were linked with travel to cholera-affected countries.

WHO South-East Asia Region: The expected post-monsoon peak in 2022 was not apparent. Low-level transmission continues in Cox’s Bazaar in Bangladesh in 2023, particularly among Forcibly Displaced Myanmar Nationals (FDMN). Both India and Nepal, which reported outbreaks in 2022, remain under monitoring. There is limited surveillance (often sentinel-based) and low reporting. There is continued risk of export to other regions.

WHO Western Pacific Region: In the Philippines, recurrent cholera outbreaks were reported in 2022 with a cumulative number of recorded cases three times higher than in 2021.  While countries of the region have overall good control capacity, there is inadequate monitoring of drinking water quality.

Table 1A & B. Summary of reported ongoing cholera outbreaks as of January 2023 





Epidemiology
Cholera is an acute diarrheal infection. When severe, it is characterized by extreme watery diarrhoea and potentially fatal dehydration. It is caused by the ingestion of food or water contaminated with the bacterium Vibrio cholerae. It has a short incubation period, ranging between twelve hours and five days. Most people will develop no or mild to moderate symptoms; about 20% of ill persons develop acute watery diarrhoea with severe dehydration and are at risk of death. Despite being easily treatable with rehydration solution, cholera remains a global health threat due to its high morbidity and mortality in vulnerable populations without access to adequate health care.

Seven distinct pandemics of cholera have been recorded over the past two centuries. The seventh pandemic, which is still going on now, is considered to have started in 1961.  During the first two decades, following (re)introduction, many countries transitioned to becoming cholera-endemic. While global incidence greatly decreased in the late 1990s, cholera remains prevalent in parts of Africa and Asia.

The global burden of cholera is largely unknown because the majority of cases are not reported, however, previous studies estimate 2.9 million cases, and 95 000 deaths occur annually.
Public health response
WHO is working with partners at global, regional & country level to support Member States in the following cholera outbreak response activities:

Coordination

Cholera headquarter Incident Management System Team (IMST) has been established.
The multi-region cholera event was graded at the global level as a grade 3 emergency, the highest grade, on 26 January 2023.
Providing a forum for technical expertise exchange through the Global Task Force on Cholera Control (GTFCC) coordination, and cooperation on cholera-related activities to strengthen the country’s capacity to prevent and control cholera.
Providing technical support to all ongoing outbreaks (laboratory, case management, OCV, IPC, WASH).
Collaborating with key partners (UNICEF, MSF) to coordinate supply and optimal access to supplies.
Leveraging resources to support global monitoring of the cholera pandemic, provide technical support to countries, enhance data collection and reporting, strengthen advocacy, and provide medical and non-medical items to countries in need, especially for case management and diagnosis.
Supporting the deployment of experts through Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN), and Standby Partners.
Risk communication and community engagement partners activated through the Collective Service.
Conducting advocacy and resource mobilization activities to support cholera prevention and control at national, regional, and global levels.
Surveillance

Strengthening surveillance including strengthening diagnostic algorithms, use of rapid diagnostic tests, collecting and transporting of samples, and strengthening laboratory capacity to culture V. cholerae.
Vaccination

Providing guidance to identify target populations for vaccination and requesting vaccine through the ICG mechanism, in the context of acutely limited supply.
Supporting advocacy to increase OCV production and engage new vaccine manufacturers.
Working with countries to identify the areas/hotspots where vaccination is most needed.3
Case management

Strengthening access and improving care quality for patients by setting-up dedicated healthcare facilities (Cholera Treatment Centers (CTCs) and Cholera Treatment Units (CTUs)) which provide: 1) high quality triage; 2) focused and protocolized clinical management; 3) identification and management of complications. This requires a skilled workforce and clear clinical pathways, ensured through training for health workers and provision of technical guidance. Communities also need to be engaged to ensure rapid hydration support to people with suspected cholera and rapid care seeking behaviour.
Embedding Oral Rehydration Points (ORPs) into the response to provide early intervention, which reduces the risk of severe disease and improves the referral processes when hospitalization is required.
Harmonizing clinical data collection, reporting, and enabling quality improvement and audit through case report forms and common documentation
Infection Prevention and Control (IPC)

Supporting countries to assess and implement safety and quality of care focused interventions in health facilities to reduce risk of health care associated cholera infections
Risk communication and community engagement (RCCE)

Working closely with communities, Member States and partners to establish RCCE coordination mechanisms embedded within the broader outbreak response, mapping partners, identifying at risk communities and trusted channels/influencers, (especially WASH interventions, case management, vaccination campaigns and community based surveillance).  
Providing support to maintain and build trust and manage risk perception and knowledge among communities about the disease, its symptoms, associated risks, precautions to take, and when to ensure adequate hydration and seek treatment when symptoms appear.
Collecting, analysing and using social and behavioural data should be to inform the outbreak response to understand behavioural drivers of transmission, effective interventions and knowledge, attitudes and practices over time.
Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH)

Working closely with communities, Member States and partners to strengthen water, hygiene, and sanitation systems through multi-sectoral mechanisms, including IPC and guidance on drinking-water quality surveillance.
Supporting countries for the implementation of effective cholera control strategies and monitoring of progress.
Supporting communities to advocate for, plan and implement sustainable WASH interventions to reduce the risk of cholera outbreaks and support response efforts.
Operations, Support, and Logistics (OSL)

Working closely with suppliers to secure Cholera Kits, sourcing other WASH supplies, and establishing a pipeline for bulk items.
WHO risk assessment
The risk of cholera is not equally distributed between regions, countries or within countries. The risk of cholera increases with decreasing access to clean water and sanitation.

However, there are a number of outbreaks occurring simultaneously across all six WHO regions (the African Region, the Region of the Americas, the Eastern Mediterranean Region, the European Region,iii the South-East Asia Region,iv the Western Pacific Region), which are straining the overall epidemic response capacity. Protracted cholera outbreaks are exhausting public health response personnel and depleting global and local resources.

Several countries including Cameroon, Ethiopia, Haiti, Lebanon, Nigeria (north-east of the country), Pakistan, Somalia, Syria and the Democratic Republic of Congo (eastern part of the country) are in the midst of complex humanitarian crises with fragile health systems, inadequate access to clean water and sanitation and have insufficient capacity to respond to the outbreaks. Climate change and a lack of development are also contributing to outbreaks.

In addition, many affected countries have highly mobile populations that may spread cholera to neighbouring countries (e.g. high risk of spread between Malawi and Mozambique, and to Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe; the surge in cases in DRC’s North and South Kivu provinces increases the risk for spread to Burundi, Rwanda, Uganda; in Somalia, the uncontrolled cross-border movement of people, including refugees/asylum seekers with neighbouring countries especially Ethiopia, Kenya, Djibouti and Yemen; heavy population movement between Pakistan-Afghanistan, Iraq-Iran; the outbreak from Syria has spread to Lebanon with a continued risk of spread into Jordan). There is also a risk of spreading to currently unaffected areas by international travel to countries such as Sierra Leone and Liberia, which are at high risk for cholera outbreaks. After at least 10 reported imported cases from Haiti between October 2022 and January 2023, the neighbouring Dominican Republic continues to report cases linked to local transmission in 2023. There is the risk of further spread in the Americas. Cross-border population movements and increased global travel following the lefting of COVID-19-related restrictions, increase the risk of further international spread.

In October 2022, the ICG made the unprecedented decision to temporarily suspend the second dose of OCV for outbreak response, due to the global shortage of OCV, which continues in 2023. Although effective, the single-dose strategy will result in a shortened duration of vaccine-induced immunity, particularly in children under five years of age, leaving the populations vulnerable to cholera the following year.

Based on the current situation, in particular: 1) the increasing number of outbreaks and geographical expansion; 2) the complex humanitarian context of many crises; 3) continuous risk of spread; 4) lack of vaccines and limited response capacity (supplies, human resources), the risk at the global level is assessed as very high and cholera remains a global threat to public health and an indicator of inequity and lack of social development.

WHO advice
WHO recommends improving access to proper and timely case management of cholera cases, improving access to safe drinking water and sanitation infrastructure, as well as improving infection prevention and control in healthcare facilities. These measures along with the promotion of rapid hydration and care seeking behaviour for potential cholera cases and preventive hygiene practices and food safety in affected communities are the most effective means of controlling cholera. Listening to and understanding community concerns, needs, challenges and capacities and positioning communities as partners in the planning and implementation of response efforts is key. This includes understanding and addressing barriers that impact the uptake of protective behaviors, the impact of stigma and discrimination and trust in health systems, actors and authorities. Recognizing community knowledge and capacities and systematically involving communities in strengthening WASH, community-based surveillance, case management and safe and dignified burial practices will build trust and help align health system response efforts with community needs. Equipping health workers to work with communities to ensure rapid care seeking behaviour and to hold safe and dignified burials will be essential to maintain trust between communities and the health system.  

The OCV should be used in conjunction with improvements in water and sanitation to control cholera outbreaks and for prevention in targeted areas known to be at high risk for cholera. Given the limited supply of OCV globally, RCCE and vaccine demand efforts should be a critical part of vaccination campaigns to ensure maximum uptake.

WHO recommends Member States to strengthen and maintain surveillance for cholera, especially at the community level, for the early detection of suspected cases and to provide adequate treatment and prevent its spread. Early and adequate treatment limits the CFR of patients to less than 1%.

WHO does not recommend any travel or trade restrictions on Member States based on the currently available information. However, as the outbreak also affects border areas where there is a significant cross-border movement, WHO encourages Member States to ensure cooperation and regular information sharing across all levels of the organization so that any spread across the border is quickly assessed and contained.





Situation at a glance
Since January 2022 to 1 February 2023, health authorities in South Sudan are responding to an ongoing outbreak of measles, with 4339 suspected cases including 388 (8.9%) laboratory-confirmed cases and 46 deaths (case fatality ratio: 1.06%) reported across the country. Two outbreaks of measles were declared by the health authorities in 2022 on 23 February and 10 December, respectively. Between March and November 2022, a total of 770,581 children were vaccinated during reactive vaccination campaigns. A nationwide vaccination campaign against measles is planned to begin in March 2023. The current outbreak may have serious public health impacts due to the low national level of measles immunization coverage which is below the expected 95% coverage to interrupt the ongoing transmission. Other factors include the most affected age group being those under five years old, and the country context where there are armed conflicts, food insecurity and internally displaced people favoring transmission.
Description of the situation
Health authorities in South Sudan have been responding to an outbreak of measles since the beginning of 2022. From 1 January 2022 to 1 February 2023, a total of 4339 suspected cases, of which 388 (8.9%) were laboratory-confirmed cases and 46 deaths (CFR: 1.06%; AR: 1.1/1000 population) have been reported from 55 counties in all of the 10 states and three administrative areas. Of the 4339 suspected cases, 3187 (73.5%) are unvaccinated. Among the unvaccinated, 2398 (75%) are under the age of five and 1021 (32%) are under the age of one. The highest cumulative number of deaths was recorded in Juba county in Central Equatoria state with 18 deaths (CFR 1.9%) and eight deaths (CFR 5.1%) reported in Cueibet county of Lakes state, while other counties reported less than five deaths in total.

South Sudan started reporting measles cases in January 2022 in two counties -Torit in Eastern Equatoria State and Maban in Upper Nile State. Following a steady increase in the number of cases across the country, South Sudan’s health authorities declared a measles outbreak on 10 December 2022. This was the country’s second declaration of a measles outbreak after the first declaration on 23 February 2022.

Figure 1: Distribution of suspected measles cases (n=4334) reported in South Sudan between 1 January 2022 and 1 February 2023 .



Note: date of onset of disease was not known for five cases

Epidemiology
Measles is a highly contagious disease caused by the measles virus and occurs as a seasonal disease in endemic areas. In tropical zones, most cases of measles occur during the dry season, whereas in temperate zones, incidence peaks during late winter and early spring.

Transmission is primarily person-to-person by airborne respiratory droplets that disperse within minutes when an infected person coughs or sneezes, and transmission can also occur through direct contact with infected secretions. Transmission from asymptomatic exposed immune persons has not been demonstrated. The virus remains active and contagious in the air or on infected surfaces for up to 2 hours.  A patient is infectious four days before the start of the rash to four days after the appearance of the rash. The virus first infects the respiratory tract before spreading to other organs.  There is no specific antiviral treatment for measles and most people recover within 2-3 weeks.

Among malnourished children and immunocompromised people, including people with HIV, cancer and treated with immunosuppressives, as well as pregnant women, measles can also cause serious complications, including blindness, encephalitis, severe diarrhea, ear infection, and pneumonia.

Although measles is highly contagious, an effective and safe vaccine is available for prevention and control. The measles-containing vaccine first dose (MCV1) is given at the age of nine months, while the second dose of measles-containing second dose (MCV2) is given at the age of 15 months. A 95% population coverage of MCV1 and MCV2 is required to stop measles circulation.

In countries with low administrative vaccination coverage, epidemics typically occur every two to three years and usually last between two and three months, although their duration varies according to population size, crowding, and the population’s immunity status.

Public health response
With support from WHO and partners, the Ministry of Health of South Sudan, has implemented response measures including enhancing measles surveillance and strengthening case management by reinforcing capacities of frontline healthcare workers, surveillance officers, and the state and county rapid response teams (RRT). In addition, response interventions include:

Strengthening coordination through activated Public Health Emergency Operation Centers (PHEOC), adoption of measles into the National Steering Committee (for COVID-19 response and Ebola Virus Disease preparedness) and other weekly coordination platforms.
Enhancing surveillance including deployment of RRTs for investigation and sampling of suspected cases.
Weekly analytics and monitoring of disease trends in affected locations.
Between March and November 2022, reactive vaccination campaigns were conducted in 16 of the 23 counties with confirmed outbreaks where 770 581 children were vaccinated.
A nationwide non-selective measles vaccination campaign, where children irrespective of their vaccination status are eligible for vaccination, is planned to begin in March 2023.
Enhancing case management of symptomatic cases through supportive management and vitamin A supplementation.
Strengthening community engagement and mobilization to increase awareness and demand for vaccine and encourage health-seeking behaviors.
Using WHO measles programmatic risk assessment tool, a risk analysis,  was conducted in March 2022. The tool identifies areas where measles programmatic activities need to be strengthened to reach elimination and reduce outbreak risk countrywide.
WHO risk assessment
In South Sudan, outbreaks of measles remain a concern due to insufficient vaccination coverage, the non-introduction of the second dose of MCV (MCV2) and the absence of supplementary vaccination activities against measles in some areas over the past three years.

South Sudan is one of the African countries with the lowest measles immunization coverage, resulting in suboptimal population immunity. The 2020 WHO-UNICEF estimates of National Immunization Coverage (WUENIC) for the first dose of measles containing vaccine (MCV1) were estimated to be 49%. 

Based on the measles risk analysis conducted in March 2022, 49 counties out of 80 (69%) in 10 states and three administrative areas are classified as “very high risk” for measles transmission. All states and three administrative areas, except for the Western Equatoria, are classified as “very high risk”. The assessment found that out of 80 counties, eight (10%) have a low risk of measles and 12(15%) are classified as ‘medium’ risk when assessing population immunity. The remaining 60 counties (75%) are classified as either “high risk” or “very high risk” for measles. This risk analysis looked at several factors including population immunity, surveillance quality, immunization programme, and threat assessment (factors that might influence the risk for measles virus exposure and transmission in the population).

Although most counties recorded very high administrative coverage for immunization for measles during reactive campaigns conducted between March and November 2022, vaccination quality was not determined by a post-campaign evaluation (PCE).

Low routine immunization coverage (69%), far below the WHO recommended sustained homogeneous coverage of at least 95%, is the main underlying cause of the multiple outbreaks in South Sudan. The low routine immunization is attributed to several factors including low access to basic healthcare estimated at 44%; insecurity that affects the functioning of health facilities; and inconsistent implementation of the basic package for nutrition and health services by public and partner-supported health facilities.

South Sudan is also experiencing severe food insecurity with 57% of the population (6.54 million people) being affected. This has increased the risk of malnutrition in children, thereby increasing the risk of severe measles and adverse outcomes, especially those with vitamin A deficiency or whose immune systems have been weakened by HIV or other chronic diseases.

Due to these multiple factors outlined above, the risk of spread of measles at the national level is assessed as high. At regional level, the risk is assessed to be moderate due to the cross-border movement of populations fleeing armed conflicts and insecurity in neighboring countries (Ethiopia, Sudan, Uganda, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Kenya) with suboptimal coverage of routine vaccination.

The risk at the global level is considered as low given the existing response capacity in place.

WHO advice
Vaccination against measles is recommended for all susceptible children and adults. Reaching all children with two doses of measles vaccine should be the standard for all national immunization programs. Countries aiming at measles elimination should achieve ≥95% coverage with both doses equitably to all children in every district.  Routine vaccination of children against measles, combined with mass immunization campaigns in countries with high morbidity and mortality rates, are key public health strategies to reduce global measles deaths. Two doses of the vaccine are recommended to ensure immunity and prevent outbreaks, as about 15% of vaccinated children fail to develop immunity from the first dose.

There is no specific treatment for measles. Case management of measles focuses on supportive care as well as the prevention and treatment of measles complications and secondary infections. Since measles is highly contagious, patient isolation is an important intervention to prevent further spread of the virus.

Supportive care includes relieving common symptoms such as fever, cough, nasal congestion or rhinorrhea, conjunctivitis, and sore mouth. Nutritional support is recommended to reduce the risk of malnutrition due to diarrhea, vomiting and poor appetite associated with measles. Breastfeeding should be encouraged where appropriate. Oral rehydration salts should be used as needed to prevent dehydration.

All children diagnosed with measles should receive two doses of vitamin A oral supplements, given 24 hours apart, irrespective of the timing of previous doses of vitamin A; 50 000 IU should be given to infants aged less than six months, 100 000 IU to infants aged 6–11 months, and 200 000 IU to children aged ≥12 months. This treatment restores low vitamin A levels in acute measles cases that occur even in well-nourished children and can help prevent eye damage and blindness. Vitamin A supplements have also been shown to reduce the number of measles deaths.

In unimmunized or insufficiently immunized individuals, measles vaccine may be administered within 72 hours of exposure to measles virus to protect against disease. If disease does develop, symptoms are usually not severe, and the duration of illness is shortened.

Healthcare workers should be vaccinated in order to avoid infections acquired in a healthcare setting.

WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions to South Sudan based on the information available for this event.





Situation at a glance
Cholera is endemic in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), including Ituri, North Kivu, South Kivu, and Tanganyika provinces, with cases reported through the year. On 14 December 2022, a cholera epidemic was officially declared by the Governor of the province of North Kivu, following the isolation of Vibrio cholerae among 140 of the 247 samples collected from suspected cases of Nyiragongo HZ. As of 4 February 2023, a total of 4386 cholera cases (of which 1009 are laboratory-confirmed) with 16 deaths (CFR 0.4%) have been reported. A multisectoral community-based response has been implemented, including a cholera vaccination campaign. Considering the fragile context in which this outbreak is taking place, ongoing armed conflicts with further displacements, concurrent epidemics, inadequate levels of access to health care, poor drinking water, hygienic and sanitary conditions, and population movements between the affected HZs and neighbouring countries (including Rwanda and Uganda), WHO assesses the risk posed by this outbreak as high at the national and regional level, and low at the global level.
Description of the situation

Cholera is endemic in several provinces in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC).

However, from mid-November to the end of 2022, there has been an upsurge in the number of reported cholera cases in the health zones of Nyiragongo and Karisimbi, in the province of North Kivu. Since then, cases have shown a declining trend (Figure 1).

Figure 1. Number of cholera cases (suspected and confirmed) reported in Nyiragongo and Karisimbi health zones. Source: line list of Nyiragongo and Karisimbi Health Zones.



In Nyiragongo, the number of new cholera cases (suspected and confirmed) increased from 51 in week 47 (21-27 November) to 556 cases in week 50 (12-18 December) of the year 2022, and to 683 cases in week 52 (December 26, 2022-January 1, 2023).

On 14 December 2022, a cholera epidemic was officially declared by the Governor of the province of North Kivu, following isolation of Vibrio cholerae in the stool of 140 cases from Nyiragongo HZ at the local laboratory in Goma.

As of 4 February 2023, a total of 4386 cholera cases (1009 laboratory-confirmed; 23%) with 16 deaths (CFR 0.4%) have been reported, of which 4011 (91.5%) are from Nyiragongo and 375 (8.5%) from Karisimbi. In the HZ of Nyiragongo, the most affected age group is 5-14 years (30.1%), followed by 1-4 years (29.7%) and 15 -29 years (16.6%); children under the age of one represent 8% of cases.

In total, 15 health areas including seven in the Nyiragongo HZ (Kanyaruchinya, Kibati, Kiziba, Mudja, Munigi, Ngangi III and Turunga) and eight in Karisimbi HZ (Baraka, Bujovu, Kasika, Katoyi, Majengo, Methodiste Mugunga and Muugano Solidarite) are currently affected by the cholera epidemic.

In the HZ of Nyiragongo, the health area of Kanyaruchinya is the most affected, contributing to 73.3% of all suspected cholera cases reported from Nyiragongo. In Karisimbi HZ, the Methodist health area is the most affected with 59.4% of all cases, followed by Baraka and Lasika health areas (both contributing to 7.3% of cases from Karisimbi HZ).

Figure 2. Cumulative number of cholera cases (suspected and confirmed) by health area in Niyragongo and Karisimbi health zones, as of 4 February 2023. Source: Nord Kivu Provincial Health Division. 

The cholera outbreak is principally affecting internally displaced populations (IDPs), with 97% of the cases reported among IDPs in the HZ of Nyiragongo, and 59% of cases among IDPs reported from the Methodist health area of Karisimbi HZ, which houses the Don Bosco IDP camp.

However, the outbreak is also spreading across the surrounding communities with nearly 3% of the cases in the HZ of Nyiragongo and 41% of the cases in the HZ of Karisimbi belonging to the host community.

Epidemiology
Cholera is an acute enteric infection caused by ingesting the bacteria Vibrio cholerae present in contaminated water or food. It is mainly linked to insufficient access to safe drinking water and inadequate sanitation. It is an extremely virulent disease that can cause severe acute watery diarrhoea resulting in high morbidity and mortality, and can spread rapidly, depending on the frequency of exposure, the exposed population and the setting. Cholera affects both children and adults and can be fatal if untreated.

The incubation period is between 12 hours and five days after ingestion of contaminated food or water. Most people infected with V. cholerae do not develop any symptoms, although the bacteria are present in their faeces for 1-10 days after infection and are shed back into the environment, potentially infecting other people. The majority of people who develop symptoms have mild or moderate symptoms, while a minority develop acute watery diarrhoea and vomiting with severe dehydration. Cholera is an easily treatable disease. Most people can be treated successfully through prompt administration of oral rehydration solution (ORS).

The consequences of a humanitarian crisis – such as disruption of water and sanitation systems, or the displacement of populations towards inadequate and overcrowded camps – can increase the risk of cholera transmission, should the bacteria be present or introduced.

A multisectoral approach including a combination of surveillance, water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH), social mobilization, treatment, and oral cholera vaccines is essential to control cholera outbreaks and to reduce deaths.

Public health response
Coordination: multisectoral coordination has been established at the provincial level, and daily coordination meetings are held in Kaniyaruchinya (Nyiragongo HZ). The incident management system (IMS) was activated at the WHO office. A budgeted preparedness and response plan has been developed and several partners are involved in the response, including WHO, which supports the Provincial Health Division (PHD) in the implementation of the health sector response in collaboration with the Ministry of Health and the other partners, such as the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), International Organization for Migration (IOM), Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF), UNICEF, World Food Programme (WFP), and Save the Children.

Epidemiological surveillance and laboratory: a surveillance and laboratory commission has been set up by the North Kivu Provincial Health Division with the support of WHO and other partners. Four data managers have been trained and equipped with computers by WHO. Training on case definition has been provided to healthcare workers and community health workers (CHW); investigation teams have also been trained on active case finding. Surveillance activities are ongoing, including active case finding, alert notification and investigation, and contact tracing and follow-up. Data is collected daily from Oral Rehydration Points (ORP), Cholera Treatment Units (CTU) and Cholera Treatment Centers (CTC). Samples are regularly collected also from suspected cases registered outside the outbreak area in order to assess the extent of the epidemic. Data is analyzed on a daily basis and shared with partners for operational decision-making. WHO also supported the National Biological Research Institute in Goma with sample transportation.

Case management: WHO and partners supported the establishment of 56 ORPs in IDP sites, four CTUs (Kibati, Kanyarucinya, Kahembe, and Don Bosco) and two CTCs (Munigi, Kiziba) in the most affected health areas, with a total capacity of 205 beds. WHO and partners also provided support for the free provision of basic health care in functional health structures in the two affected health zones to ensure the maintenance of essential health services for vulnerable populations.

Infection Prevention and Control (IPC)/Water, Hygiene and Sanitation (WASH): an IPC/WASH commission has been set up by the North Kivu PHD and supported by partners including WHO and UNICEF. Systematic decontamination of households and public spaces is implemented by trained teams. Training for safe and dignified burials is also carried out. In IDP sites a total of 1706 latrines, 293 showers, 91 hand-washing stations and 62 well sites have been established. Regular supply of water is made through cisterns. Training for healthcare workers and hygiene workers on IPC practices is also carried out regularly.

Risk communication and community engagement: Several advocacy meetings were held with community leaders and political-administrative authorities. Community workers have been trained to raise awareness about cholera, and preventive measures are communicated door-to-door and during public meetings with the affected population.

Vaccination: At the national level, coordination meetings were organized to ensure the preparation of the vaccination campaign against cholera in the two affected health zones. WHO provided support to the Ministry of Health for the mobilization from the vaccination International Coordination Group (ICG) of 364 137 doses of oral cholera vaccines in the two affected HZs. With the support of The Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization (GAVI), after its launch by the Governor of North Kivu province on January 25, 2023, the Oral Cholera Vaccination (OCV) campaign in three HZs of North Kivu PHD (including in IDP sites) took place between 25-30 January 2023 and immunized 351 207 people aged one year and older out of a target of 364 137, i.e. partial coverage of 96.4%.

WHO risk assessment
Cholera is endemic in parts of DRC. In 2022, according to data from the National Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response System, a total of 18 403 suspected cases of cholera, including 302 deaths (CFR 1.6%), were notified in the DRC, in 104 HZs of 19 of the 26 provinces of the country.

However, the current epidemic is showing a rapid upsurge in a fragile context such as IDPs camps.

For years, DRC has been experiencing several armed and community conflicts, particularly in the east, putting the country in a state of unprecedented humanitarian and health crisis.

Due to internal armed clashes, which intensified in 2022, nearly 450 857 new IDPs arrived in North Kivu (which already hosts 1.9 million of IDPs). Of them, 53.4% (240 579) are hosted in the territory of Nyiragongo and particularly 97.7% (235 111) in IDPs sites, which are characterized by overcrowding, poor hygiene and sanitation conditions, very limited access to drinking water, latrines and basic health services. In addition, population movements are regularly observed between the affected HZs and the other HZs in the province of North Kivu as well as the rest of the country, where the populations also have limited access to drinking water, good hygiene and sanitation conditions, as well as to health care facilities.

Moreover, the current rainy season may favor the spread of the epidemic in other HZs.

With the ongoing armed conflicts, displacements are likely to continue, leading to a worsening of the humanitarian context and the vulnerabilities of the populations, including the need for basic social services. All this is evolving in a context of a fragile health system; recurrent attacks on hospital infrastructures and reduced availability of services. Other outbreaks are also ongoing (COVID-19, yellow fever, poliomyelitis, measles, mpox (monkeypox), meningitis, etc.) and there are extremely limited human, material and financial resources.

The risk of cholera spreading to neighboring countries cannot be ruled out. Indeed, there are population movements between the affected health zones and neighboring countries, including Rwanda and Uganda.

The affected HZs border the city of Goma, which has an international airport. Countries in the Great Lakes sub-region (Rwanda, Uganda, Burundi), which are most at risk of cholera importation from the current epidemic hotspots in North Kivu, have inadequate levels of access to health care, poor drinking water, hygienic and sanitary conditions. A cholera epidemic is also ongoing in Burundi with 120 suspected cases and 1 death reported as of 7 February 2023. This epidemic affects the city of Bujumbura, which is located on the shores of Lake Tanganyika on the border with South Kivu, with population movements across the border.

The outbreak is occurring against a backdrop of a surge in cholera outbreaks globally, which has constrained the availability of vaccines, tests, and treatments.

Considering the above-described scenario, WHO assesses the risk posed by this outbreak as high at the national and regional level, and low at the global level.

WHO advice
A multi-pronged approach is essential to combat cholera and reduce mortality. The measures used combine surveillance, improvement of water supply, sanitation and hygiene, social mobilization, treatment of the disease and oral cholera vaccines. Countries affected by cholera are advised to strengthen disease surveillance and national preparedness to rapidly detect and respond to possible outbreaks.

WHO recommends improving access to proper and timely case management of cholera cases, improving access to safe drinking water and sanitation infrastructure, as well as improving infection prevention and control in healthcare facilities. These measures along with the promotion of preventive hygiene practices and food safety in affected communities are the most effective means of controlling cholera. Effective risk communication and community engagement strategies are needed to encourage behavioral change and the adoption of appropriate preventive measures.

Measures aimed at improving environmental conditions include applying long-term sustainable solutions for water supply, sanitation and hygiene in cholera-prone areas. In addition to cholera, these interventions can also prevent a wide range of other water-borne diseases and contribute to achieving goals in education and the fight against poverty and malnutrition. Solutions for water supply, sanitation and hygiene related to cholera are in line with the Sustainable Development Goals.

Rapid access to treatment is essential during a cholera outbreak. Oral rehydration should be available in communities and not just in larger health centers that can offer intravenous infusions and management at any time. With rapid and appropriate care, the case fatality rate should remain below 1%.

Community mobilization must continue as an integral part of the response and should cover information on the symptoms of cholera, on the precautions to take to protect against the disease, and the need to promptly seek care when symptoms appear.

The OCV should be used in conjunction with improvements in water and sanitation to control cholera outbreaks and for prevention in targeted areas known to be at high risk for cholera.

WHO recommends Member States to strengthen and maintain surveillance for cholera, especially at the community level, for the early detection of suspected cases and to provide adequate treatment and prevent its spread. Early and adequate treatment limits the CFR of patients to less than 1%.

WHO does not recommend any travel or trade restrictions to the Democratic Republic of Congo based on the currently available information.




Description of the situation
Situation at a glance

Malawi is experiencing a widespread cholera outbreak, with 36 943 cases and 1210 associated deaths reported from all 29 districts since 3 March 2022. This is the deadliest outbreak of cholera in the country’s history.

Cholera has been endemic in Malawi since 1998 with seasonal outbreaks reported during the rainy season (November through May). However, the current outbreak has extended through the dry season, with cases being reported since March 2022.

In light of the ongoing rainy season, wide geographical spread, and a consistently high case fatality rate (CFR) of above 3%, the ongoing cholera outbreak was declared a public health emergency by the Malawi government on 5 December 2022.  Currently, the large geographic spread and the high number of reported cases in the country are stretching all capacity to respond to the outbreak, increasing the risk of serious public health impact. The outbreak in Malawi is occurring against a backdrop of a surge in cholera outbreaks globally, which has constrained the availability of vaccines, tests, and treatments.

With a sharp increase of cases seen over the last month, fears are that the outbreak will continue to worsen without strong interventions.

Description of the cases

On 3 March 2022, the Ministry of Public Health of Malawi notified WHO of a cholera outbreak after laboratory confirmation of a cholera case in Machinga district hospital on 2 March 2022.

Between 3 March 2022 through 3 February 2023, a total of 36 943 cases, including 1210 deaths, have been reported from all 29 districts in Malawi (overall case fatality rate (CFR) 3.3%) with active transmission ongoing in 27 of 29 districts. There was a 143% increase in the number of cases in January (17 078) compared to December (7017 cases). As of 3 February, Mangochi district bordering Lake Malawi is the most affected area, reporting 6974 cases and 114 deaths (CFR 1.6%).

The current outbreak started in March 2022 from Machinga district following tropical storm Ana (January 2022) and Cyclone Gombe (March 2022) which caused floods leading to the displacement of a population with low pre-existing immunity and had lack of access to safe water, sanitation, and hygiene. The outbreak was mainly limited to the flood-affected areas in the southern region until August 2022 when it spread to the northern and central parts of the country. Since December 2022 cases have spread back towards the south of the country with all regions affected including Blantyre and Lilongwe, the two main cities of the country.

Since the beginning of the outbreak, and as of 3 February 2023, the age group 21 to 30 years is the most affected (27.7% of cases) followed by the 11 to 20 age group (22.8%). Of all the cases,17 943 are males representing 57% of the caseload. Most deaths have been reported among those aged 60 years and above as of 29 January 2023. Most deaths have occurred among males (66%).

From 1998 to date, cholera cases have been reported in the country, especially in the southern region, which is low-lying, flat, and prone to flooding during the rainy season. The highest numbers of cases and deaths were reported in 1998/99 (25 000 cases, 860 deaths, CFR 3.4%), 2001/02 (33 546 cases, 968 deaths, case fatality rate 2.3%), and 2008/09 (5751 cases, 125 deaths, CFR 2.2%).

Figure 1: Number of suspected and confirmed cholera cases (n=36 943) and deaths (n=1210) per day in Malawi, 3 March 2022 to 3 February 2023.



Source: Malawi Ministry of Health and Population

Figure 2: Geographical distribution of confirmed and suspected cholera cases (n=36 943) and deaths (n=1210) by District in Malawi, 3 March 2022 to 3 February 2023.



Source: Malawi Ministry of Health and Population

Figure 3. Age-sex distribution of confirmed and suspected cholera cases (n=36 943) in Malawi, 3 March 2022 to 3 February 2023.



Source: Malawi Ministry of Health and Population

Epidemiology of Cholera

Cholera is an acute enteric infection caused by ingesting the bacteria Vibrio cholerae present in contaminated water or food. It is mainly linked to inadequate sanitation and insufficient access to safe drinking water. It is an extremely virulent disease that can cause severe acute watery diarrhoea resulting in high morbidity and mortality, and can spread rapidly, depending on the frequency of exposure, the exposed population and the setting. Cholera affects both children and adults and in its’ severe form can be fatal within hours if untreated.

The incubation period is between 12 hours and five days after ingestion of contaminated food or water. Most people infected with V. cholerae do not develop any symptoms, although the bacteria are present in their faeces for 1-10 days after infection and are shed back into the environment, potentially infecting other people. Most people who develop symptoms have mild or moderate symptoms, while a minority develop severe forms of the disease with acute watery diarrhoea and vomiting leading to severe dehydration. Cholera is an easily treatable disease. Most people can be treated successfully through prompt administration of oral rehydration solution (ORS) and successful rehydration therapy can keep the CFR below 1%.

The consequences of a humanitarian crisis – such as disruption of water and sanitation systems, or the displacement of populations towards inadequate and overcrowded camps – can increase the risk of cholera transmission, should the bacteria be present or introduced.

A multi-sectoral approach including a combination of surveillance, water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH), social mobilization, treatment, and oral cholera vaccines is essential to control cholera outbreaks and to reduce deaths.

Public health response
Emergency response activities are being conducted by the Ministry of Health, WHO and other partners since the declaration of the outbreak in March 2022.

Coordination and response:

The ongoing cholera outbreak has been declared a public health emergency by government of Malawi on 05 December 2022. This led to the incorporation of cholera into its Presidential Taskforce on Coronavirus Disease, to be responsible for coordination of the outbreak response. The Presidential Task Force members on COVID-19 and cholera have been visiting all affected district to understand the situation.
A costed national cholera response plan to manage the outbreak was drafted and is being updated regularly. WHO and other partners are supporting the implementation of various activities aligned with the plan. National- and district-level emergency operation centres (EOCs) have been operationalized to coordinate the multisectoral response with other partners.
Multisectoral coordination group for cholera response has been established in the affected districts.
The National Incident Management Team (IMT) continues to coordinate technical response to the outbreak. The IMT meets twice a week at the Public Health Emergency Operations Centre (PHEOC) in Lilongwe. The WHO IMT team is meeting three times a week for updates in between the National IMT to coordinate how to provide support efficiently across all response pillars.
All technical thematic areas led by the Ministry of Health with support from WHO and partners continue to routinely provide technical support and coordinate field-level implementation.
Cross-border preparedness is ongoing, with meetings held by health officials from MOH, WHO and Partners in Mozambique and Zambia through inter-district committees.
Surveillance:

National rapid response teams (RRT) have been deployed to all the affected districts.
Health Surveillance Assistants have been trained on active case investigation and surveillance.
Detection of cases at community and health facilities levels continue. Rapid response team established in each districts continue to investigate cases.
Data collection and analysis is ongoing, and situation reports are being produced and published regularly. Deep-dive epidemiological analysis of the cholera situation is ongoing.
Data collection tools have been harmonized, printed and distributed to all districts. More tools are being printed to meet the rising demand of reporting with the high volume of cases.
The Ministry of Health with support from WHO and partners have strengthened community-based surveillance for early detection of cases through the utilization of community health volunteers. Lilongwe district which is one of the most affected districts has initiated integrated community interventions to interrupt transmission and reduce cholera-related deaths. The same interventions have been implemented in six high-burden districts and then rolled out across all the districts.
Joint Ministry of Health and WHO field operational visits are ongoing in districts with high case load and deaths.
The recruitment and deployment of surveillance officers and data analysts in high-burden districts to improve reporting and data quality is ongoing.
Currently a team of local and international surge staff is in country to support strengthening of information management, surveillance and data management. The team continues to produce information products in form of daily and weekly situation reports, maps detailing case and mortality burden, location of cholera treatment centers (CTCs)/ cholera treatment units (CTUs), profiling of deaths by age group, location and treatment facilities they are occurring to guide targeted interventions.  
Health System Strengthening/Case Management:

Case management was initially conducted through very large numbers (345) of cholera treatment units (CTUs) across all affected districts. As the extent and geography of cases has become clearer, this has been rationalised, with fewer centres. This presents an opportunity to strengthen the quality of care while respecting the decentralised approach. In some areas of high need, new structures have been set up or expanded (for example Bwaila and Area 25 in Lilongwe).
Review and assessment of CTUs has been conducted across four regions in the last week (Salima, Blantyre, Lilongwe, Balaka), and more than 20 sites, with immediate needs identified and logistical input sought. This included the establishment of improved water and electricity supplies, improved waste management, and provision of beds and medical equipment for dealing with critical illness.
Staff training has included, in collaboration with partners and Ministry of Health, 13 doctors, 46 trainer-of-trainers, and approximately 200 nursing staff ready to deploy to areas of need.
Core standardised materials for patient care have been created and agreed with the MoH to enable the recording of treatment and response (including fluids and observation charts).
To establish patient-level data to inform on care quality and to enhance our understanding of cholera presentations, a paper and electronic data capture form has been agreed with MoH, and begun to be deployed to CTCs.
A network of supportive supervision from the tertiary hospitals has been created, with provision for outreach from specialist centres into patient treatment areas in order to enhance quality of care delivered, and support CTU staff.
Partner and centre mapping continues, with the identification of formal and informal referral pathways. This includes those from high-burden areas, and specific demographics (e.g. under 2-year-olds), and has informed the strengthening of CTC staff numbers.
WHO and partners supporting the establishment of oral rehydration points (ORPs) in high burden communities, inclusive of area 25, area 18, Likuni and Bwaila communities. Currently, 47 (ORPs) have been established in 10 high burden districts to serve as primary care points for cases in the communities. Church leaders, chieves, village headmen and community health workers and volunteers were orientated on the operation of ORPs and emphasis on their community engagement. The provision of ORPs needs to be scaled rapidly to provide early intervention and avoid admission with severe dehydration.
Supportive supervision visits are being conducted on infection prevention and control and water, sanitation, and hygiene in CTCs in three districts. Main areas mentored on include patient segregations according to severity of disease during care in the CTC, handling of inserted devises, waste management, linen management, management of chlorine, use of personal protective equipment (PPE), management of guardians, and environmental cleaning.
The teams also visited three communities in the three districts to assess WASH, including sanitary inspections of water sources, sanitation facilities, safe water accessibility, household water chlorination and conducted health education in communities.
Capacity Building/IPC:

Training of trainees has been conducted on cases management in Nkhotakota, Rumphi, Likoma, Chitipa, Nkhatabay, Mzimba North, Mzimba South and Karonga.
Ongoing community field visits to assess WASH, including sanitary inspections of water sources, sanitation facilities, safe water accessibility, household water chlorination and conducted health education in communities.
On-site IPC training and mentorship has been conducted amongst health care workers in CTCs/CTUs across all the districts in Northern Districts.
Human Resource:

Ministry of Health has advertised on recruitment of surge staff to support cholera response in the districts Blantyre, Karonga, Lilongwe, Mangochi, Nkhatabay, Nkothakota, Rumphi, and Salima.
WHO is supporting the recruitment of 40 medical doctors (21 already reported for duty as of 03 February 2023), 80 clinical technicians and 160 nurses to support in the CTCs/CTUs across the country.
Laboratory:


WHO is supporting the Ministry of Health in increasing laboratory testing capacity and diagnostics to continue to monitor incidence in all affected areas with a focus on early detection and confirmation of new cases in unaffected areas, as well as genomic sequencing of Vibrio cholerae.
The WHO is supporting capacity building, provision of reagents, and standard operating procedures.
Collection of samples for sequencing is ongoing. Meanwhile, periodic testing of cases is being done with 5-10 samples being collected systematically every week from CTCs/CTUs.
Logistics and Supplies:

Cholera kits and other supplies including oral rehydration salt, IV Fluids, antibiotics, rapid diagnostic test kits, personal protective equipment, tents, and cholera beds have been provided by WHO and partners in affected districts.
Treatment structures and ORS points have been established in the affected districts. Currently, 345 CTC and CTUs were established with 140 being active, and 47 ORPs set up in 10 districts serving over 180 000 population at high risk.
WHO has provided cholera kits and other supplies which are being distributed to the affected districts, supporting 48 000 cholera cases since the beginning of the outbreak. Additional supplies are being mobilized.
As of 03 February 2023, 35 cholera kits (drug module) composed of 17 600 litres of ringers are in shipment to arrive in country.
1271 ringers lactate (500 ml) and 5300 bags of ORS have been dispatched by WHO to District Hospitals with a high burden of disease including Lilongwe.
Reactive Vaccination Campaigns:

Two oral cholera vaccine (OCV) vaccination campaigns have been conducted across 21 districts since the onset of the outbreak.

Following a request for OCV to the International Coordinating Group on Vaccine Provision (ICG) and approval in May 2022, a total of 1 947 696 doses were received as the first batch. Reactive vaccination campaign for one round of OCV was implemented in eight districts including Balaka, Blantyre, Chikwawa, Machinga, Mangochi, Mulanje, Nsanje and Phalombe between 23 through 27 May 2022. The cumulative vaccination coverage achieved was 69%.
A second request for OCV was submitted to the ICG in October 2022, and 2 941 982 doses were approved for a single dose campaign. The campaign was implemented from 28 November through 2 December 2022 in 13 districts: Chitipa, Kasungu, Nsanje, Rhumphi, Salima, Karonga, Zomba, Mzimba North and South, Nkhatabay, Nkhotakota, Lilongwe, Likoma. The cumulative coverage achieved was 83.6%.
Ongoing provision of OCV continued beyond the campaign period with additional campaigns in Mangochi and Blantyre (beyond the 13 targeted district). In total, 96.8% (2 825 229 doses) of the population residing in communities with high risk and burden of cholera were reached with OCV. 
Risk Communication and Community Engagement:

Community and national radios are being used for spreading awareness in the affected communities and spreading message for cholera prevention. Four community radios (Nkhotakota, Nkhatabay, Mzimba and Rumphi) produced jingles, airing radio programs and live panel discussion with support from UNICEF.
WHO has supported the creation of Information, education and communication materials (WASH cholera brochure, cholera poster, leaflet for health workers, posters on waste management, OCV campaign posters).
Local leaders and health-based leaders have been engaged by health promotion officers with support from Red Cross.
Districts authorities have been communicated to write letters to churches, chiefs and local community structures to strengthen cholera prevention measures in the community and during gatherings.
Knowledge, Attitude and Perception survey has been conducted in Blantyre, Salima Nkhatabay to understand the drivers of the cholera outbreak and guide targeted interventions in the affected communities.
WASH Interventions:

Provision of mobile latrines in the cholera treatment camps and installation of prefabricated latrines in five camps.
Households in the affected districts are being sensitized on WASH promotion including water treatment and hand hygiene.
House-to-house chlorination is ongoing in affected communities in all the districts.
Water quality monitoring tests have been donated by UNICEF and have been distributed across the districts to strengthen water quality surveillance.
Water quality surveillance have been conducted in Balaka, Blantyre, Chikwawa, Karonga, Machinga, Mangochi, Mwanza, Neno, Nsanje, Mwanza, Salima, Nkhotakota, and  Nkhatabay.
Supply of High-Test Hypochlorite by The Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) to Nkhotakota, Nkhatabay, Rumphi, Karonga and Mzimba
A total of 9579 chlorine dispensers have been installed in four districts including Zomba, Blantyre, Balaka and Mangochi.
Continued distribution of 1% stock solution is being done to community members in all districts by Health Surveillance Assistants.
WHO risk assessment
Cholera is endemic in Malawi with seasonal outbreaks occurring during the wet season. The first major outbreak occurred in 1998 and was widespread in the Southern Region, with 25 000 cases reported. Prior to the current outbreak, the largest outbreak in Malawi occured from October 2001 to April 2002, and affected 26 of the 29 districts, with 33 546 cases and 968 deaths (CFR 3%). 

Following floods in the southern region in January 2022, the Ministry of Health confirmed a cholera outbreak on 3 March 2022. This outbreak, which was initially limited to the Southern Region and the flood-affected areas, has now spread to all the regions and districts in the country. Transmission has continued during the dry season (June to October), which is traditionally a low transmission period for Malawi. With the onset of the rainy season from November through May, the number and spread of cholera cases is expected to increase further. Therefore, the risk is considered to be very high at the national level. The poor WASH capacities in the affected districts, especially in the fishing communities along Lake Malawi, pose risk for the continuous propagation of the cholera outbreak nationally, to neighbouring countries and in the region.

Two reactive single-dose OCV campaigns have been carried out in parts of 21 affected districts, however unvaccinated sub-districts and districts still remain at risk. Other identified challenges from the most at-risk districts include inadequate capacity for case management and diagnosis in the affected areas resulting in delayed case detection and poor outcomes. This is further exacerbated due to delayed care-seeking behaviour of the community.

There is a continued risk for further increase in the number of cases and international spread. Confirmed cases have been reported across the border in Mozambique and the risk for cross-border transmission between Malawi and Mozambique remains high during the current outbreak.

The country has experience in controlling cholera outbreaks. However, due to concurrent outbreaks (polio, COVID-19), the large geographic spread of the outbreak (with cases reported in all districts) and the high case numbers, the current burden is overstraining existing national response capacity and resources as well as the capacity of partners’ support. In addition, there are multiple ongoing large cholera outbreaks worldwide. This is stretching limited global stocks of cholera supplies and OCV, which limits available resources for Malawi and the region.

WHO assesses the risk of this outbreak to be very high at national and regional level. On 21 January 2023, WHO assessed the risk of the global cholera outbreak as very high due to ongoing multiple cholera outbreaks in many WHO regions. 

WHO advice
There is an urgent need to improve access to safe water sanitation and hygiene. WHO recommends improving access to safe drinking water and sanitation infrastructure, improving access to proper and timely case management of cholera cases as well as improving infection, prevention, and control in healthcare facilities. Promotion of preventive hygiene practices and food safety in affected communities are the most effective means of controlling cholera. Targeted public health communication messages are a key element for a successful response. OCV should be used in conjunction with improvements in water and sanitation to control cholera outbreaks and for prevention in targeted areas known to be at high risk for cholera.

One of the factors contributing to the high CFR in Mangochi, Blantyre, Machinga, Lilongwe was late presentation to a health facility. Delay in health-seeking behaviour, and limited community sensitization can lead to treatment delays and increased deaths, as well as an underestimation of the scale of the outbreak (cases and related deaths). WHO recommends Member States to strengthen and maintain surveillance for cholera, especially at the community level, for the early detection of suspected cases and to provide adequate treatment and prevent its spread. Early and adequate treatment limits the CFR of hospitalized patients to less than 1%. Inter-district and cross-border coordination and collaboration, risk communication, and community engagement are crucial in the prevention and containment of this cholera outbreak.  

WHO does not recommend any travel or trade restrictions on Malawi based on the currently available information. However, as the outbreak is taking place in border areas where there is a significant cross-border movement, WHO encourages Malawi and its neighbouring countries to ensure cooperation and regular information sharing so that any spread across the border is quickly contained.




Situation at a glance
On 5 January 2023, Oman IHR-NFP notified WHO of a case of Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV), in a 60-year-old male, from North Batinah Governorate in Oman. The case had no history of physical contact with dromedaries, goats, sheep or contact with camel products, milk, or urine. Based on the investigation conducted to identify potential exposure sources within the 14 days prior to the onset of symptoms, camel racing exercises were found to have been conducted in the area of the patient’s residence in North Batinah Governorate. A total of 76 close contacts were followed for 14 days from the date of last exposure with the case. No secondary cases have been reported to date.
Description of the situation

On 5 January 2023, the National IHR Focal point of Oman notified WHO of one case of MERS-CoV from North Batinah Governorate in Oman.

The case, a 60-year-old male, non-healthcare worker, with comorbidities, who is a resident of North Batinah Governorate, developed symptoms including chest discomfort, shortness of breath, and fever on 28 December which lasted for six days. On 2 January, he was taken to the emergency department of a secondary hospital where he was admitted to the Cardiology Unit for non-invasive ventilation. Prior to admission at the hospital, the case sought medical attention in two healthcare facilities for his symptoms. The case subsequently showed clinical and radiological improvement and was discharged on 16 January 2023.

Screening for Severe Acute Respiratory Infection (SARI) was initiated on 3 January 2023 and MERS-CoV was confirmed by real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) testing. Investigation of the history of exposure to the known risk factors in the 14 days prior to the onset of the symptoms identified camel racing exercises conducted in the same area as the patient’s residence in North Batinah Governorate. The case, a driving instructor by occupation, had no history of physical contact with dromedaries, goats, sheep or contact with camel products, milk, or urine.

The last MERS-CoV infection was reported from Oman in May 2022. The first ever laboratory-confirmed case of MERS-CoV in Oman was reported in June 2013. Since then, including this current case, Oman has reported 26 cases of MERS-CoV including seven deaths (CFR 27%).

Epidemiology
Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) is a viral respiratory infection that is caused by a coronavirus called Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV). Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect contact with dromedary camels who are the natural host and zoonotic source of the MERS-CoV infection.

MERS-CoV infections range from asymptomatic or mild respiratory symptoms to severe acute respiratory disease and death. A typical presentation of MERS-CoV disease is fever, cough and shortness of breath. Pneumonia is a common finding, but not always present. Gastrointestinal symptoms, including diarrhoea, have also been reported. The virus appears to cause more severe disease in older people, persons with weakened immune systems and those with chronic diseases such as renal disease, cancer, chronic lung disease, and diabetes. Severe illness can cause respiratory failure that requires mechanical ventilation and support in an intensive care unit and can result in high mortality.

No vaccine or specific treatment is currently available, although several MERS-CoV-specific vaccines and treatments are in development. Treatment is supportive and based on the patient’s clinical condition.

Public health response
Exposure history of the case was collected to identify the source of exposure.
The contacts list included 24 contacts from family members and workplace, and 51 health care workers (12 from two Health Care facilities and 39 from the hospital where he was admitted), and one patient. 
The health care workers in the hospital followed the Ministry of Health (MOH) Infection Prevention and Control guidelines for using Personal Protective Equipment (PPE).
All identified contacts were traced, monitored and followed up for symptoms for 14 days from the last date of exposure to the MERS-CoV patient, especially high-risk contacts among healthcare workers.
Out of 76 contacts, seven contacts developed mild respiratory symptoms (five healthcare workers and two family members), as per the MOH Infection Prevention and Control guideline for MERS-COV exposures and cases. These seven cases have been tested for MERS-CoV by RT-PCR and the results were negative.
WHO risk assessment
Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) is a viral respiratory infection of humans and dromedary camels which is caused by a coronavirus called Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV). Infection with MERS-CoV can cause severe disease resulting in high mortality. Since 2012, globally the case fatality rate (CFR) for MERS-CoV cases is approximately 36%, but this may be an overestimate of the true mortality rate, as mild cases of MERS may be missed by existing surveillance systems and until more is known about the disease, the case fatality rates are counted only amongst the laboratory-confirmed cases reported to WHO.

Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect contact with dromedaries who are a host and zoonotic source of MERS-CoV infection. MERS-CoV has demonstrated the ability to be transmitted between humans. So far, the observed non-sustained human-to-human transmission has occurred among close contacts and in healthcare settings. Outside of the healthcare setting there has been limited human-to human transmission.

Cases of MERS-CoV infection are rare in Oman.  Since June 2013, a total of 26 MERS-CoV cases and seven deaths, including this current case, have been reported to WHO from Oman.

The total number of laboratory-confirmed MERS-CoV infection cases reported globally to WHO is 2603 including 935 associated deaths (CFR 36%) as of December 2022. The majority of the reported cases have occurred in countries in the Arabian Peninsula. Outside of this region, there has been one large outbreak in the Republic of Korea, in May 2015, during which 186 laboratory-confirmed cases (185 in Republic of Korea and one in China) and 38 deaths (CFR 21%) were reported. The global number reflects the total number of laboratory-confirmed cases and deaths reported to WHO under IHR (2005) to date.

The notification of this case does not change the overall risk assessment. WHO expects that additional cases of MERS-CoV infection will be reported from the Middle East and/or other countries where MERS-CoV is circulating in dromedaries, and that cases will continue to be exported to other countries by individuals who were exposed to the virus through contact with dromedaries or their products (for example, consumption of raw camel milk), or in a healthcare setting.

WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessments based on the latest available information.

WHO advice
Surveillance: Based on the current situation and available information, WHO re-emphasizes the importance of strong surveillance by all Member States for acute respiratory infections, including MERS-CoV, and to carefully review any unusual patterns.

Infection prevention and control in healthcare settings: Human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV in healthcare settings has been associated with delays in recognizing the early symptoms of MERS-CoV infection, slow triage of suspected cases and delays in implementing Infection Prevention and Control (IPC) measures. IPC measures are therefore critical to prevent the possible spread of MERS-CoV between people, particularly in healthcare facilities.

Healthcare workers should always apply standard precautions consistently with all patients, at every interaction in healthcare settings:

Droplet precautions should be added to the standard precautions when providing care to patients with symptoms of acute respiratory infection.
Contact precautions and eye protection should be added when caring for probable or confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection.
Airborne precautions should be applied when performing aerosol-generating procedures or in settings where aerosol-generating procedures are conducted.
IPC strategies to prevent or limit transmission in healthcare settings include the following:

ensuring triage, early recognition, and source control (isolating patients with suspected MERS-CoV);
applying standard precautions for all patients;
implementing empiric additional precautions (droplet and contact and, whenever applicable, airborne precautions) for suspected cases of MERS-CoV;
implementing administrative controls;
using environmental and engineering controls.
Infection prevention and control in the community: General hygiene measures, such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals and avoiding contact with sick animals, should be adhered to. Food hygiene practices should be observed. People should avoid consuming raw camel products like milk or urine or eating meat that has not been properly cooked.

MERS-CoV appears to cause more severe disease in people with underlying chronic medical conditions such as diabetes, renal failure, chronic lung disease, and immunocompromised persons. Therefore, people with these underlying medical conditions should avoid close contact with animals, particularly dromedary camels, when visiting farms, events (e.g., camel races, or camel beauty pageants), markets, or barn areas where dromedaries are present.

Case management: Early identification, case management and isolation of cases, quarantine of contacts, together with appropriate infection prevention and control measures in health care settings and public health awareness can prevent human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV.

Timely, effective, and safe supportive management of patients with MERS should be provided, particularly for those at risk of more severe disease.

International travel and trade: WHO does not advise specific MERS-CoV screening at points of entry with regard to this event, nor does it currently recommend the application of any travel or trade restrictions.


Situation at a glance
From 1 November 2022 to 27 January 2023, a total of 559 cases of meningitis (of which 111 are laboratory confirmed), including 18 deaths (overall CFR 3.2%), have been reported from Zinder Region, southeast of Niger, compared to the 231 cases reported during 1 November 2021 to 31 January 2022. The majority of laboratory-confirmed cases (104/111; 93.7%) are due to Neisseria meningitidis serogroup C (NmC). Reactive vaccination campaigns with the trivalent ACW meningococcal polysaccharide vaccine have been implemented. Niger is located largely in the African meningitis belt with seasonal outbreaks recurring every year. However, the ongoing outbreak shows both an increased number of cases and an increased growth rate compared to the previous seasons. Zinder region shares an international border with Jigawa State in Nigeria where a NmC outbreak is also ongoing, confirming the risk of international spread. Moreover, the simultaneous occurrence of other epidemics, insecurity and population displacement, all in the context of a protracted humanitarian crisis, are likely to contribute to the spread of the outbreak in other countries of the West African subregion. WHO assesses the risk posed by the current meningitis outbreak in Niger as high at the national level, moderate at the regional level, and low at the global level.
Description of the situation

Being located in the African meningitis belt, Niger has been affected by several meningitis epidemics resulting in 20 789 cases and 1369 deaths (CFR 6.6%) reported since 2015.

From 1 November 2022 to 27 January 2023, a total of 559 cases of meningitis (of which 111 are laboratory confirmed), including 18 deaths (overall CFR 3.2%) have been reported from Zinder region, southeast of Niger, compared to the 231 cases reported during 1 November 2021 to 31 January 2022.

The last meningitis outbreak in the Zinder region, occurred in the 2021/2022 season, with a total of 372 cases, including 12 deaths (CFR 3%).

Figure 1. Epicurve of cases of meningitis reported in Niger by month, 1 October 2021 - 27 January 2023. 

Of the 228 samples collected from suspected cases, 154 (67.5%) have been analyzed by Niamey's Center for Medical and Health Research (CERMES). Neisseria meningitidis serogroup C was identified in the majority of confirmed cases (n=104; 93.7%), followed by Streptococcus pneumoniae (n=5; 4.5%) and Haemophilus influenzae (n=2; 1.8%). The remaining 43 samples tested negative.

Males represent 53% of all cases. Among the total of 559 cases of meningitis, people under 20 years of age are the most affected by the outbreak (n=538; 96.3%), with 202 cases (36.2%) reported in the 10-14 years age group, followed by the 5-9 years age group with 153 cases (27.4%), the 15-19 years age group with 107 cases (19.1%), and the 0-4 years age group with 76 cases (13.6%).

The most affected health district of Zinder region is Dungass (342 cases, 6 deaths), followed by Matamèye (98 cases, 3 deaths), Mirriah (72 cases, 3 deaths), Magaria (38 cases, 5 deaths), Zinder ville (7 cases, 1 death) and Gouré (2 cases, 0 deaths).

Figure 2. Distribution of reported meningitis cases by health district, Zinder region, Niger, 1 November 2022 – 27 January 2023. 

Epidemiology
Meningitis is a serious infection of the meninges, the membranes covering the brain and spinal cord. Several different bacteria can cause meningitis, however, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, Neisseria meningitidis (N. meningitis) are the most frequent ones, and are transmitted from person to person through droplets of respiratory or throat secretions from infected people.

A total of 12 serogroups of N. meningitidis have been identified, six of which (A, B, C, W, X and Y) can cause meningococcal meningitis epidemics.

The average incubation period is 4 days but can range between 2 and 10 days. The most common symptoms of meningitis are a stiff neck, high fever, sensitivity to light, confusion, headaches and vomiting. Even with early diagnosis and adequate treatment, 5% to 10% of patients die, typically within 24 to 48 hours after the onset of symptoms. Bacterial meningitis may result in brain damage, hearing loss or a learning disability in 10% to 20% of survivors. A less common, but even more severe (and often fatal), form of meningococcal disease is meningococcal septicaemia, which is characterized by a haemorrhagic rash and rapid circulatory collapse.

The highest burden of disease is seen in a region of sub-Saharan Africa, known as the African Meningitis Belt, which is especially recognised to be at high risk of meningococcal but also pneumococcal meningitis epidemics.

Niger is located largely in the African meningitis belt, where meningitis epidemics typically follow a seasonal pattern (usually from January to June), with a size that varies from year to year. In 2015, a large meningitis outbreak attributed to NmC occurred, affecting nearly 10 000 people. In 2009 and 2006, meningitis outbreaks caused by N. meningitidis serogroups A (NmA) and X (NmX), respectively, were also reported. Haemophilus influenzae and Streptococcus pneumoniae are two other important pathogens that contribute significantly to the bacterial meningitis burden within Niger.

Licensed vaccines against meningococcal, pneumococcal and haemophilus influenzae diseases have been available for many years. These bacteria have several different strains (known as serotypes or serogroups) and vaccines are designed to protect against the most harmful strains. Over time, there have been major improvements in strain coverage and vaccine availability, but no universal vaccine against these infections exists.

In the African meningitis belt, meningococcus serogroup A accounted for 80–85% of meningitis epidemics before the introduction of a meningococcal A conjugate vaccine through mass preventive campaigns (since 2010) and into routine immunization programmes (since 2016). Among vaccinated populations, incidence of serogroup A meningitis has declined by more than 99%, and no serogroup A case has been confirmed since 2017.

However, cases of meningitis and outbreaks due to other meningococcal serogroups, apart from serogroup B, continue to strike.

Public health response
A technical committee has been established in the Zinder region to coordinate the response to the epidemic. The meningitis response plan has been finalized and implemented. An international team from WHO and other partners including MSF and UNICEF has been deployed to support the response.
Surveillance system activities have been reinforced in the Zinder region especially in Dungass health district, including case investigations. Laboratory activities are ongoing, including sample collection and confirmation from suspected meningitis cases.
Case management activities have been strengthened, including procurement of the antibiotic ceftriaxone, cases isolation, deployment of health workers for case management, distribution of case management guidelines and provision of free treatment to cases.
A request for 608 960 doses of trivalent ACW polysaccharide vaccine was approved and delivered by the International Coordinating Group (ICG) on Vaccine Provision in two batches of approximately 300 000 doses each on 31 December 2022 and 9 January 2023.
Reactive vaccination campaigns with the trivalent ACW meningococcal polysaccharide vaccine have been implemented by the MoH with the support of WHO and The Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization (GAVI) in the Health Districts of Dungass, Gouré, Mirriah and Matamèye, targeting the age group 2 to 29 years. The overall vaccination coverage reached is 99.8%.
Risks communication and community engagement activities are ongoing in close cooperation with administrators and community leaders in affected districts, delivering health advice and infection, prevention and control recommendations through community radios and other channels, including door-to-door sensitisation on the need to immediately seek medical assistance if symptoms occur to promptly start treatment.
WHO risk assessment
The ongoing outbreak shows both an increased number of cases and an increased growth rate compared to the previous seasons.

Moreover, the meningitis epidemic season (usually from January to June, marked by high temperatures and dry winds combined with heavy dust, a period known as the harmattan), the mixing of populations, the simultaneous occurrence of other epidemics in the same region (measles, diphtheria and COVID-19), insecurity and population displacement, all in the context of a protracted humanitarian crisis, are likely to contribute to the spread of the outbreak.

The Zinder region borders Jigawa State in Nigeria, where a NmC outbreak is also ongoing, confirming the risk of international spread to other countries of the West African subregion.

WHO assesses the risk posed by the current meningitis outbreak in Niger as high at the national level, moderate at the regional level, and low at the global level.

WHO advice
Meningococcal meningitis remains a public health concern with a high case fatality rate and leading to serious long-term complications.

Preventing meningitis through vaccination is the most effective way to reduce the burden and impact of the disease by delivering long-lasting protection. The rollout of multivalent meningococcal conjugate vaccines is a public health priority to eliminate bacterial meningitis epidemics in the African meningitis belt. Introduction into routine immunization programmes and maintaining high coverage will be critical to avoid the resurgence of epidemics.

Antibiotics for close contacts of meningococcal cases, when given promptly, decrease the risk of transmission. Outside the African meningitis belt, chemoprophylaxis is recommended for close contacts within the household. Within the meningitis belt, chemoprophylaxis for close contacts is recommended in non-epidemic situations. Ciprofloxacin is the antibiotic of choice, and ceftriaxone an alternative.

Admission to a hospital or health centre is necessary. Isolation of the patient is not usually advised after 24 hours of treatment.

Appropriate antibiotic treatment must be started as soon as possible. Ideally, lumbar puncture should be done first as antibiotics can make it more difficult to grow bacteria from the spinal fluid. However, blood sampling can also help to identify the cause and the priority is to start treatment without delay. A range of antibiotics is used to treat meningitis, including penicillin, ampicillin, and ceftriaxone. During epidemics of meningococcal and pneumococcal meningitis, ceftriaxone is the drug of choice.

The response to epidemics consists of appropriate case management, active community-based case-finding and reactive mass vaccination of affected populations. Surveillance, from case detection to investigation and laboratory confirmation is essential to the control of meningitis.

Reactive vaccination campaigns have been implemented in Zinder region, and monitoring the spread to new areas is crucial to guide further response activities, including considering further vaccine requests if appropriate. Timeliness of the reactive campaign is critical, ideally within four weeks of crossing the epidemic threshold.

WHO does not recommend any restriction on travel and trade to Niger on the basis of the information available on the current event.




Situation at a glance
On 23 January 2023, the Paraguay IHR National Focal Point notified WHO of a measles case in a 14-month-old boy from Itapúa Department, who had onset of fever and rash on 15 September 2022. The case was notified as a highly suspected case of measles in September 2022, and on 11 October 2022, the case was laboratory confirmed by the Central Public Health Laboratory (LCSP. as per its acronym in Spanish) in Paraguay. Although the case had no history of receiving routine vaccination as per the immunization schedule, one dose of MMR (MMR1) was given on 12 September 2022 as part of measles vaccination campaign conducted in the affected department between November 2021 to 16 December 2022 . Due to the history of recent vaccination, the case samples were sent to United States Center for Disease Control and Prevention (US CDC) for further molecular analysis, which tested positive for measles and negative for measles vaccine strain on 10 January 2023. The case had no history of travel, however, 30 days prior to developing symptoms, he came into contact with a symptomatic family member, diagnosed as having an allergic reaction at the time, and who was a contact of a family member with a history of periodic travel to Buenos Aires, Argentina. Control measures, such as strengthening surveillance activities, were implemented by the local and national authorities as soon as the case was notified in September 2022. This is the first case of measles reported in Paraguay since 1998.
Description of the situation

On 23 January 2023, the Paraguay IHR National Focal Point notified WHO of a confirmed case of measles in Itapúa Department, Paraguay. Itapúa is close to the southern border of the country with Argentina. The case is a 14-month-old boy who had onset of rash and fever on 15 September 2022. He had no travel history and had received one dose of MMR vaccine (MMR1) on 12 September 2022. According to the information received,  30 days prior to onset of symptoms,  the case was in contact with a 16-month-old child, a symptomatic family contact, diagnosed as having an allergic reaction including fever, rhinorrhea and skin lesions. This symptomatic family contact was a contact of a family member with a history of periodic travel to Buenos Aires, Argentina. 

On 26 September 2022, a serum sample was collected and sent to LCSP which was reactive for measles by Immunoglobulin M ( IgM). On 11 October, a second serum sample was collected and sent to the LCSP and tested reactive for measles by IgM and IgG. Further, on 16 November, serum and urine samples were sent to the US CDC for confirmation, and additional molecular analysis was performed which tested positive for measles by reverse transcriptase – quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) on 10 January 2023, and negative for measles vaccine strain.

In Paraguay, the official measles vaccination coverage for the first and second dose of measles, mumps and rubella vaccine (MMR) in 2021 was reported to be  56% and 55%, respectively, lower than the WHO recommended sustained homogeneous coverage of at least 95%.  The last National MMR Vaccination Campaign was conducted from November 2021 to 16 December 2022 including the department of Itapúa.

This is the first case of measles reported in Paraguay since 1998.

Epidemiology
Measles is a highly contagious viral disease, which affects susceptible individuals of all ages and remains one of the leading causes of death among young children globally. The mode of transmission is airborne or via droplets from the nose, mouth, or throat of infected persons. Initial symptoms, which usually appear 10-12 days after infection, include high fever, usually accompanied by one or several of the following symptoms: runny nose, bloodshot eyes, cough, and tiny white spots on the inside of the mouth. Several days later, a rash develops, usually starting on the face and upper neck and gradually spreading downwards. A patient is infectious four days before the start of the rash to four days after the appearance of the rash. There is no specific antiviral treatment for measles and most people recover within 2-3 weeks.

Among malnourished children and immunocompromised people including people with HIV, cancer and treated with immunosuppressives, as well as pregnant women, measles can also cause serious complications, including blindness, encephalitis, severe diarrhea, ear infection, and pneumonia.

Measles can be prevented by immunization. In countries with low administrative vaccination coverage, epidemics typically occur every two to three years and usually last between two and three months, although their duration varies according to population size, crowding, and the population’s immunity status.

Public health response
The following public health measures were implemented by local and national health authorities:

Intensified epidemiological surveillance through active and retrospective institutional case finding, contact tracing, and monitoring of contacts. 
Rapid assessment of vaccination coverage in the community, and if needed, rapidly deploying measles containing vaccine (MCV) in the field targeting those who have missed one or two doses of MCV.  Additionally, in September 2022, a total of  181 people , between the age of one and 60 years and above, were surveyed in the surrounding area where the case was detected. Of these 181 people surveyed, 107 were vaccinated against measles and rubella, with a coverage of 59%.
Training was provided to health care providers on case management and measles surveillance.
Strengthening  the laboratory networks.  
WHO risk assessment
In 2016, the WHO Region of the Americas was the first Region of the World Health Organization (WHO) to be declared free of the endemic transmission of measles virus by the International Expert Committee (IEC) for documenting and verifying measles, rubella and the congenital rubella syndrome in the Americas. However, keeping the Region free of measles is an ongoing challenge due to the permanent risk of importation and reintroduction of the virus.

In 2021, five countries and territories (countries hereafter) have achieved ≥95% coverage for the first dose of MMR (MMR1) in the Region of the Americas, while 13 countries had MMR1 coverage of less than 80%. For MMR2, only two countries had ≥95% coverage and 36 countries had less than 80% coverage.

Several factors have contributed to the outbreaks of measles in the Region of the Americas occurring between 2017 and 2022, including lack of compliance with 2-dose measles vaccination coverage, influenced by the COVID-19 pandemic. During the same period, there are gaps in the performance of international indicators for integrated measles/rubella surveillance.

In Paraguay, risk of disruption to routine immunization activities remains due to both the COVID-19 related burden on the health system and decreased demand for measles vaccination because of physical distancing requirements or community reluctance. Disruption of immunization services, even for brief periods, can result in an increased number of susceptible individuals and raise the likelihood of outbreak-prone vaccine-preventable diseases (VPDs) such as measles.

WHO advice
WHO recommends strengthening efforts to implement the Plan of Action for the Sustainability of Measles, Rubella, and Congenital Rubella Syndrome Elimination in the Americas 2018-2023, with a focus on: 1) guaranteeing universal access to measles vaccination services; 2) strengthening the capacity of epidemiological surveillance systems for measles, rubella, and congenital rubella syndrome; 3) developing national operational capacity to maintain the elimination status; 4) establishing standard mechanisms for rapid response to imported measles, rubella, and congenital rubella syndrome cases, in order to prevent the re-establishment of endemic transmission in the Region’s countries.

To avoid the spread of measles beyond this case, WHO recommends maintaining sustained homogeneous coverage of at least 95% with the first and second doses of the MCV in all municipalities and strengthened surveillance to achieve timely detection of all suspected cases in public, private, and social security healthcare facilities.

WHO recommends strengthened surveillance particularly in high-traffic border areas to rapidly detect and respond to highly suspected measles cases.

WHO also recommends managing imported measles cases to avoid the re-establishment of endemic transmission through the activation of rapid response teams trained for this purpose, and by implementing national rapid response protocols when there are imported cases. Once a rapid response team has been activated, continued coordination between the national, sub-national and local levels must be ensured, with permanent and fluid communication channels between all levels. During outbreaks, it is recommended to establish adequate hospital case management in order to avoid nosocomial transmission, with appropriate referral of patients to isolation rooms (for any level of care) and avoiding contact with other patients in waiting rooms and/or other hospital rooms.

WHO recommends vaccination of at-risk populations (without proof of vaccination or immunity against measles and rubella), such as healthcare workers, persons working in tourism and transportation (hotels, airports, border crossings, mass transportation, and others), as well as international travelers. Implementing a plan to immunize migrant populations in high-traffic border areas, prioritizing those considered at-risk, including both migrants and residents, to increase vaccination coverage in order to increase population immunity.

WHO recommends maintaining a stock of the measles-rubella (MR) and/or MMR vaccine, and syringes/supplies for control actions of imported cases. Access to vaccination services should be facilitated, according to the national scheme, to foreigners; people from the same country who perform temporary activities in countries with ongoing outbreaks; displaced populations; indigenous populations, or other vulnerable populations.

WHO does not recommend any restriction on travel and trade to Paraguay, based on the information available on the current outbreak.



Situation at a glance
On 9 January 2023, WHO was notified of a human infection caused by an avian influenza A(H5) virus. The case, a nine-year-old girl, living in a rural area in the province of Bolívar, Ecuador, was in contact with backyard poultry, which was acquired a week before the onset of her symptoms. She is currently hospitalized, in isolation, and is being treated with antivirals. This is the first reported case of human infection caused by avian influenza A(H5) virus in the Latin America and the Caribbean region. Work is ongoing to further characterize the virus. Currently, available epidemiological and virological evidence suggests that influenza A(H5) viruses have not acquired the ability for sustained transmission among humans, thus the likelihood of human-to-human spread is low.
Description of the situation
On 9 January 2023, the Ecuador IHR National Focal Point (NFP) informed WHO of a human case of infection with an avian influenza A(H5) virus. The case was detected as part of severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) sentinel surveillance and was confirmed by the National Influenza Centre (NIC), the National Institute of Public Health Research (INSPI per its acronym in Spanish). 

The case is a nine-year-old girl, with no known comorbidities, from Bolívar Province, Ecuador. She developed symptoms of conjunctival pruritus and coryza on 25 December 2022. On 27 December, she was brought to a local health center for medical evaluation and treatment.  On 30 December, due to the persistent symptoms including nausea, vomiting and constipation, she was admitted to a general hospital where empirical treatment for meningitis was started with antibiotics and antipyretics. On 3 January 2023, she was transferred to a pediatric hospital in critical condition where she was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) with septic shock and was treated with antivirals and mechanical ventilation due to pneumonia.  

On 5 January, as part of SARI surveillance activities, a nasopharyngeal sample was collected from the patient. The sample was sent to INSPI and tested positive for influenza A(H5) by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) on 7 January. 

As of 17 January, the patient remains hospitalized, under isolation, and with noninvasive mechanical ventilation.
According to the epidemiological investigation in response to the outbreak, a week before the onset of her symptoms, the family acquired poultry which died without apparent cause on 19 December 2022. In addition, the epidemiological investigations revealed that several incidents of dead backyard poultry (chickens and ducks) have been reported from the same community where the family resided. 

Epidemiology
Zoonotic influenza infections in humans may be asymptomatic or may cause disease, from conjunctivitis or mild, flu-like symptoms to severe, acute respiratory disease or even death, depending on factors related to the virus causing infection and the infected host. Rarely, gastrointestinal or neurological symptoms have been reported. 

Human cases of infection with avian influenza viruses are usually the result of direct or indirect exposure to infected live or dead poultry or contaminated environments.
Public health response
Public health measures from both human and animal health agencies have been implemented. These include:

Local authorities carried out epidemiological investigations and follow-up of the case’s contacts in the family, home, and health care facilities.
Ongoing intersectoral activities with the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MAG), and the Phytosanitary and Animal Health Regulation and Control Agency (Agrocalidad) for active detection, follow-up and control of avian influenza outbreaks in the area.
Continuous follow-up of persons with respiratory symptoms and suspected influenza cases due to contact with poultry or/and who have been exposed to birds, among the exposed population.
Seasonal influenza vaccination in risk groups is ongoing according to the guidelines of the National Immunization Program.
The NIC is in the process of sending the patient’s samples to a WHO Collaborating Center for further characterization.
WHO risk assessment
This is the first reported case of human infection caused by avian influenza A(H5) virus in Ecuador and in Latin America and the Caribbean. This human case was exposed to poultry, which died without apparent cause. Outbreaks of highly pathogenic avian influenza have been detected recently in the provinces of Cotopaxi (influenza A(H5N1)) and Bolívar, Ecuador.

Whenever avian influenza viruses are circulating in poultry, there is a risk for sporadic infection and small clusters of human cases due to exposure to infected poultry or contaminated environments. Therefore, human cases are expected, although rare.

According to the information received thus far, the virus has not been detected in other individuals beyond this single case. While further characterization of the virus from this case is pending, currently available epidemiological and virological evidence suggests that influenza A(H5) viruses have not acquired the ability for sustained transmission among humans, thus the likelihood of human-to-human spread is low. Based on available information, WHO assesses the risk to the general population posed by this virus to be low. The risk assessment will be reviewed as needed should further epidemiological or virological information become available.

A global risk assessment associated with recent influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b viruses was published on 21 December 2022. However, the subtype and clade information for this human case is not yet known.

There are no approved vaccines for preventing influenza A(H5) in humans. Candidate vaccines to prevent influenza A(H5) infection in humans have been developed for pandemic preparedness purposes.

Close analysis of the epidemiological situation, further characterization of the most recent viruses (human and poultry) and serological investigations are critical to assess associated risk and to adjust risk management measures in a timely manner.

WHO advice
The reported case does not change the current WHO recommendations on public health measures and surveillance of influenza.

WHO does not advise special traveler screening at points of entry or restrictions regarding the current situation of influenza viruses at the human-animal interface.

Due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect and monitor virological, epidemiological, and clinical changes associated with emerging or circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal) health, and timely virus sharing for risk assessment. The diversity of zoonotic influenza viruses that have caused human infections is alarming and necessitates strengthened surveillance in both animal and human populations, thorough investigation of every zoonotic infection and pandemic preparedness. Vaccination against seasonal influenza infection of selected groups at increased risk of exposure to animal influenza viruses could be considered as a measure to reduce opportunities for the simultaneous infection of humans with animal and human influenza viruses.

In the case of a confirmed or suspected human infection caused by a novel influenza virus with pandemic potential, including a variant virus, the health authorities should be notified and appropriate clinical case management, including testing, triage, clinical assessment for disease severity classification, assessment of risk factors for severe disease and isolation and treatment (e.g., antivirals and supportive care) should be provided. A thorough epidemiologic investigation (even while awaiting the confirmatory laboratory results) of a history of exposure to animals, and travel, and contact tracing should be conducted.  The epidemiologic investigation should include early identification of unusual respiratory events that could signal person-to-person transmission of the novel virus. Clinical samples should be tested and sent to a WHO Collaboration Centre for further characterization.

Travelers to countries with known outbreaks of animal influenza should avoid farms, contact with animals in live animal markets, entering areas where animals may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with animal faeces. Travelers should also wash their hands often with soap and water. Travelers should follow good food safety and hygiene practices. Should infected individuals from affected areas travel internationally, their infection may be detected in another country during travel or after arrival. If this were to occur, further community level spread is considered unlikely as this virus has not acquired the ability to transmit easily among humans.

All human infections caused by a novel influenza subtype are notifiable under the International Health Regulations (IHR) and State Parties to the IHR (2005) are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a recent human infection caused by an influenza A virus with the potential to cause a pandemic. Evidence of illness is not required for this notification.

WHO does not recommend any restrictions on travel and/or trade for Ecuador based on available information on this event.





Situation at a glance
On 11 January 2023, the Ministry of Health (MoH) of Uganda declared the end of the Ebola disease outbreak caused by the Sudan ebolavirus that affected nine districts. A total of 164 cases (142 confirmed, 22 probable) with 77 deaths (55 among confirmed cases and 22 among probable cases) were reported during the outbreak. In accordance with WHO recommendations, the declaration was made 42 days (twice the maximum incubation period for Sudan ebolavirus infections) after the sample from the last admitted case that was collected on 29 November 2022 tested negative before discharge, and the last confirmed death was accorded a safe and dignified burial on 29 November 2022. Although the outbreak has been declared over, health authorities are maintaining surveillance to rapidly identify and respond to any re-emergence. A follow-up programme has been put in place to support survivors. Neighbouring countries remain on alert and are encouraged to continue strengthening their capacities to detect and respond to infectious disease outbreaks.
Description of the situation

On 11 January 2023, the Ministry of Health (MoH) of Uganda declared the end of the Ebola disease outbreak caused by the Sudan ebolavirus (SUDV) that affected nine out of 146 districts: Bunyangabu, Jinja, Kagadi, Kampala, Kassanda, Kyegegwa, Masaka, Mubende, and Wakiso. This declaration follows a 42-day period after the last confirmed case tested negative on 29 November 2022 and was released from care on 30 November, and the last confirmed death was accorded a safe and dignified burial on 29 November 2022.  

Uganda declared an outbreak of Ebola disease caused by Sudan ebolavirus on 20 September 2022, after a case at Mubende Regional Referral Hospital (MRRH) in Mubende district was confirmed by the Uganda Virus Research Institute (UVRI). In total,164 cases (142 confirmed, 22 probable) with 77 deaths (55 among confirmed cases and 22 among probable cases) and 87 recovered patients, were reported.

A higher proportion of cases occurred among males (59%), while the most affected age group was represented by those aged 20-29 years (31%), followed by those aged 30-39 years (30%). A quarter of cases were reported among children under 10 years old. Overall, 19 confirmed cases with seven deaths occurred among healthcare workers (HCWs).

Mubende was the epicentre of the outbreak, accounting for 45% of confirmed cases (64 confirmed and 19 probable), followed by Kassanda with 35% of confirmed cases (49 confirmed and 2 probable), Kampala with 13% of confirmed cases (17 confirmed and 1 probable), Wakiso with 3% of confirmed cases (4 confirmed cases), Kyegegwa with 2% of confirmed cases (3 confirmed cases), Jinja with 1% of confirmed cases (2 confirmed cases), and Bunyangabo, Kagadi and Masaka, which reported one confirmed case each (Table 1).

Table 1. Number of cases and deaths (confirmed and probable) of Ebola disease caused by SUDV, by district, as of 10 January 2023.

From 20 September to 10 January 2023, a total of 4793 contacts were listed and 11 025 alerts were reported, of which 8088 (73%) were investigated and 7382 (67%) were validated as suspected cases of Ebola disease caused by Sudan ebolavirus. 

During this period, 1087 safe and dignified burials (SDB) were undertaken (all suspected deaths had to be tested and accorded a SDB), and 6681 samples were tested for Sudan ebolavirus. 

A total of 314 603 travelers were screened at international points of entry and four suspected cases of SUDV were detected, who all tested negative.

Public health response
Coordination: Uganda MoH, together with WHO and other partners, initiated response measures to control the outbreak and prevent further spread. The MoH activated the national and district emergency management committees to coordinate the response.

Surveillance: WHO supported the MoH in the implementation of enhanced surveillance activities. Multidisciplinary teams were deployed to the field to actively search for cases, identify, list, and follow-up contacts for 21 days.

Partner support: Following a Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN) Request for Assistance, a total of 69 offers of support were received from 23 partner institutions. Eleven experts were deployed to the field and three are still supporting the response in the functions of case management, infection prevention and control (IPC), and Go.Data implementation (Go.Data is the initiative of a group of public health partners and is managed by the GOARN with the aim to provide an outbreak investigation tool for field data collection during public health emergencies).

Over USD 27 million was mobilized from Development Partners in cash and in-kind contributions including from the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), UK Aid, Norwegian Government, Novo Nordisk Foundation, The Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF), Irish Aid, United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), The Directorate-General for European Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid Operations (DG ECHO), Sweden, Luxemburg, the Republic of Korea and donors contributing to the WHO Contingency Emergency Funds (CFE).

Vaccination trial: WHO convened an expert meeting to prioritize candidate vaccines. In coordination with Ugandan researchers, health authorities, and regulators, a ring vaccination trial protocol was developed and locally approved. Three candidate vaccines were identified and over 5000 doses of these arrived in the country with the first batch on 8 December and the last two on 17 December.

Survivor Care Programme: Out of the 142 confirmed cases, 87 survivors were registered. An Ebola Survivors program (ESP) has been established following WHO guidance on clinical care for survivors of Ebola virus disease, with the goal to improve the wellbeing of survivors by integrating survivor health care into the National MoH System. WHO led the ESP planning, supported the needs assessments, and the establishment of three clinics, located in geographical areas where survivors are residing. Two of the three clinics are already operational. All survivors have had at least one clinical evaluation and have received at least one psychosocial support session with the clinic and community teams respectively.

Laboratory and clinical case management: WHO, GOARN, and partners supported the MoH in the establishment of screening, triage, isolation and care areas at designated reference hospitals in affected districts to identify suspected patients; and also supported the establishment of Ebola treatment centres in affected districts, and Ebola testing mobile laboratories. Treatment centres have been equipped with essential medicines and supplies to deliver safe, optimized supportive care, including personal protective equipment (PPE), monitoring devices, point-of-care laboratory testing, intravenous fluids, and supportive oxygen devices. WHO and GOARN deployed clinical experts and organized bio-secured, patient flow circuits that allowed close monitoring of cases. Over time, isolation areas and treatment centres were able to manage both suspected and confirmed patients according to WHO guidelines and standards. For confirmed patients, access to investigational products was provided within the locally approved expanded access protocols under the MEURI ethical framework while the Randomized Clinical Trial (RTC) protocol was under development.

Risk Communication and Community Engagement (RCCE) activities: WHO supported RCCE activities and awareness campaigns implemented by the MoH, as messages run by local radio stations, social media messages, door to door sensitisation of communities. A festive season RCCE plan was also developed to orient RCCE activities in Uganda and prevention in neighboring countries.

Preparedness in neighboring countries: Ministries of Health, WHO, in-country and international partners, supported Sudan Virus Disease (SVD) preparedness and operational readiness activities in neighboring countries that were identified as at-risk through risk assessments (Burundi, Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan, Rwanda, and Tanzania).

Over 2000 health workers were trained during the outbreak on IPC, psychosocial support and care for both patients and affected families, and enhanced clinical care for SVD patients.

WHO risk assessment
The outbreak is declared over, with no new cases reported for 42 consecutive days.

This outbreak is not unexpected given that SVD is enzootic, present in animal reservoirs in the region.  Uganda reported four SVD outbreaks in 2000, 2011, and two in 2012 prior to this last one in 2022, in addition to two Ebola outbreaks caused by the Zaire ebolavirus in 2007 and 2018. It is therefore likely that the filoviruses are present in the wild animal reservoir in the region. Thus, the risk of re-emergence of any filoviruses through exposure to an animal host or from a persistent virus cannot be excluded.

This outbreak showed that re-emergence of SVD is a major public health concern in Uganda.  Strengthening of surveillance capacities can help to detect future outbreaks preventing further spread.

Ebola is a severe, often fatal illness affecting humans. While licensed therapeutics and vaccines are available, in limited numbers, to treat and prevent infections of Zaire ebolavirus, there are currently no licensed vaccines or therapeutics for SUDV.

WHO considers that ongoing challenges in terms of epidemiological surveillance, infection prevention and control programs and practices in health care settings, coupled with the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as ongoing outbreaks, such as Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever (CCHF), Rift Valley fever, yellow fever, cholera, and measles, might jeopardize the country’s ability to rapidly detect and respond to any re-emergence.

WHO advice
Successful SVD outbreak control relies on applying a package of interventions, including case management, early supportive care, risk communication and community engagement, surveillance and contact tracing, strengthening laboratory capacity, safe and dignified burials.

Although the outbreak has been declared over, WHO advises health authorities to maintain surveillance activities in place. Neighbouring countries are encouraged to remain on alert and continue strengthening their capacities to detect and respond to infectious disease outbreaks.

WHO advises the following risk reduction measures as an effective way to reduce SVD and other the transmission of other Ebolavirus diseases in humans:

To reduce the risk of wildlife-to-human transmission from contact with wild animals such as infected fruit bats or non-human primates and the consumption of their raw meat, animals should be handled with gloves and other appropriate protective clothing. Meat should be thoroughly cooked before consumption.
To reduce the risk of human-to-human transmission from direct or close contact with people with Ebola symptoms, particularly with their bodily fluids, people in affected communities should be encouraged to continue frequent hand hygiene including when entering or visiting health facilities and to remain alert for symptoms of Ebola.
To reduce the risk of possible transmission from virus persistence in some body fluids, WHO recommends that recovered patients are provided with medical care, psychological support, and biological testing (until two consecutive negative tests) through an SVD survivors care programme.  WHO does not recommend isolation of convalescent patients whose blood has tested negative for SVD.
To prevent future amplification of transmission through health care, it’s recommended to strengthen IPC programmes within the health care system. Healthcare workers should always follow standard precautions when caring for patients, regardless of their presumed diagnosis. Implementation of IPC measures in health care (e.g. hand hygiene, training of health workers, adequate PPE supplies, waste management, environmental cleaning, and disinfection etc.) with ongoing monitoring and supervision is required.
Provide training of the multi-disciplinary health workforce for early detection, isolation, and treatment of SVD cases as well as re-training on safe and dignified burials and the IPC ring approach.
Ensuring the provision of safe and dignified burials, supporting IPC in community settings (including adequate water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) facilities, hand hygiene capacity and safe waste management), implementing community engagement and social mobilization activities, are essential to prevent future transmission.
Maintain capacities for logistic support in at-risk areas or countries, including supply chain (stockpiles) for essential medicines and supplies to deliver optimized supportive care for suspected and confirmed patients.
Collect, analyse and report the clinical characterization of SVD patients in order to better understand the clinical phenotypes and presentation and care for patients in future outbreaks.  Use of WHO Global clinical platform is recommended.
Maintain capacities to surge SVD clinical care in case of future outbreaks; this includes screening protocols, referral pathways, SVD clinical guidelines, trained multidisciplinary staff for clinical surge, and designated infrastructure/health care sites that can provide patient-centered and community-acceptable SVD care that meets quality standards.
Maintain capacities to surge and implement clinical trials on therapeutics using WHO RCT protocol in case of future outbreaks.
Based on the current risk assessment and prior evidence on Ebola outbreaks, WHO advises against any restriction of travel and trade to Uganda.



Situation at a glance
On 18 December 2022, the IHR National Focal Point for Sudan notified WHO of the detection of a circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) in a 48-month-old male with acute flaccid paralysis (AFP), from West Darfur in Western Sudan. The case had onset of paralysis on 31 October. The isolated virus is most closely related to a strain that circulated in Borno State, Nigeria, in 2021, and is unrelated to a cVDPV2 strain that caused an outbreak in Sudan in 2020. On 28 November, the Federal Ministry of Health (FMOH) launched an immunization campaign for children under the age of 13 years in the affected areas. Field investigations were immediately launched by local and national public health authorities, with support from partners of the Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI).
Description of the situation

On 18 December 2022, the IHR National Focal Point for Sudan notified WHO of the detection of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) in a 48-month-old male with acute flaccid paralysis (AFP), from West Darfur, Western Sudan. The case had the onset of paralysis on 31 October. Two stool specimens were collected on 10 and 12 November 2022 and were confirmed to be cVDPV2 on 16 December. Sequencing results showed that the isolate has undergone 38 nucleotide changes.  The isolated virus is most closely related to the strain that circulated in Borno state, Nigeria, in 2021. The current case is a new importation and is unrelated to the cVDPV2 strain that caused an outbreak in Sudan in 2020. 

In 2020, the cVDPV2 outbreak affected 15 of 18 states in Sudan. The outbreak was caused by a cVDPV2 imported from Chad, which caused paralysis in 58 children. The end of the outbreak was declared in August 2022, after the Outbreak Response Assessment (OBRA) was conducted from 2 July to 1 August 2022.

According to the WHO-UNICEF 2021 estimates of national polio immunization coverage in Sudan, the oral poliovirus vaccine third dose (OPV3) and inactivated poliovirus vaccine first dose (IPV 1) coverage were 85% and 94% respectively.

Epidemiology
Polio is a highly infectious disease that largely affects children under five years of age, causing permanent paralysis (approximately 1 in 200 infections) or death (2-10% of those paralyzed).

The virus is transmitted by person-to-person, mainly through the fecal-oral route or, less frequently, by a common vehicle (e.g., contaminated water or food) and multiplies in the intestine, from where it can invade the nervous system and cause paralysis. The incubation period is usually 7–10 days but can range from 4–35 days. Up to 90% of those infected are either asymptomatic or experience mild symptoms and the disease usually goes unrecognized.

Vaccine-derived poliovirus is a well-documented strain of poliovirus mutated from the strain originally contained in OPV. OPV contains a live, weakened form of poliovirus that replicates in the intestine for a limited period, thereby developing immunity by building up antibodies. On rare occasions, when replicating in the gastrointestinal tract, OPV strains genetically change and may spread in communities that are not fully vaccinated against polio, especially in areas where there is poor hygiene, poor sanitation, or overcrowding. The lower the population immunity, the longer this virus survives and the more genetic changes it undergoes.

In very rare instances, the vaccine-derived virus can genetically change into a form that can cause paralysis as does the wild poliovirus – this is what is known as a vaccine-derived poliovirus (VDPV). The detection of VDPV in at least two different sources and at least two months apart, that are genetically linked, showing evidence of transmission in the community, should be classified as ‘circulating’ vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2). 

Public health response
The FMOH declared the outbreak of polio in Sudan within 24 hours after the laboratory confirmation of the case. Additionally, the FMOH, with support from WHO, UNICEF and partners of the GPEI, have implemented the following public health measures:

Completed detailed case investigation.
An internal consultation of experts was convened to discuss the public health actions to be taken.
On 28 November, the Federal Ministry of Health (FMOH) launched an immunization campaign for children under the age of 13 years in the affected areas.
A risk assessment was conducted on 22 December 2022 and based on the outcome of the assessment, two rounds of National Immunization Days were proposed to the Outbreak Response and Preparedness Group, with a target population of 8 964 477 children under the age of five for each round.
WHO risk assessment
The emergence of cVDPV2 indicates gaps in routine immunization.  It also highlights the importance of maintaining high levels of routine vaccination coverage everywhere to minimize the risk and consequences of the circulation of any poliovirus, as well as the need to ensure quality surveillance for early detection of any poliovirus.

Furthermore, extensive population movement within country and across the borders coupled with sub optimal population immunity due to low vaccination coverage increase the risk of disease spreading across the country.

WHO advice
It is important that all countries, in particular those with frequent travel and contacts with polio-affected countries and areas, strengthen surveillance for AFP cases and commence planned expansion of environmental surveillance in order to rapidly detect any new virus importation and to facilitate a rapid response. Countries, territories and areas should also maintain uniformly high routine immunization coverage at the district level to minimize the consequences of any new virus introduction.

WHO’s International International Travel and Health and Health recommends that all travelers to polio-affected areas be fully vaccinated against polio. Residents (and visitors for more than four weeks) from infected areas should receive an additional dose of oral polio vaccine (OPV) or inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) within four weeks to 12 months of travel. 

Based on the advice of an Emergency Committee convened under the International Health Regulations (2005), the risk of the international spread of poliovirus remains a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC). Countries affected by poliovirus transmission are subject to Temporary Recommendations. To comply with the Temporary Recommendations issued under the PHEIC, any country infected by poliovirus should declare the outbreak as a national public health emergency, ensure the vaccination of residents and long-term visitors and restrict at the point of departure travel of individuals, who have not been vaccinated or cannot prove their vaccination status.

WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions to Sudan based on the information available for this current event.



Situation at a glance
This is an update on the yellow fever situation in the WHO African Region since the last disease outbreak news was published on 2 September 2022. From 1 January 2021 to 7 December 2022, a total of 203 confirmed and 252 probable cases with 40 deaths (Case Fatality Ratio 9%) were reported to WHO from 13 countries in the WHO African Region. Risk factors for further yellow fever spread and amplification include low population immunity, population movements, viral transmission dynamics, and climate and environmental factors that have contributed to the spread of Aedes mosquitoes. Recent Reactive Vaccination Campaigns increase population immunity and may have contributed to reducing the risk of yellow fever spread in targeted countries, resulting in a gradual downward trend in reported confirmed cases in 2022. However, the countries remain at high risk.
Description of the situation

In 2022, 12 countries in the WHO African Region have reported confirmed cases of yellow fever (Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Chad, Côte d'Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ghana, Kenya, Niger, Nigeria, the Republic of the Congo, Sierra Leone and Uganda). Eight of these countries are experiencing a continuation of transmission from 2021 (Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Chad, Côte d'Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ghana, Nigeria, and the Republic of the Congo) and four countries are newly reporting confirmed cases (Kenya, Niger, Sierra Leone and Uganda). One country, Gabon, reported an isolated confirmed case in 2021, but no further cases were registered in 2022.

Since 2021, a total of 203 confirmed and 252 probable cases with 40 deaths and a CFR of 9% have been reported. Of these, 23 deaths have been reported among confirmed cases (CFR among confirmed cases 11%) (Table 1). The high overall CFR among confirmed cases in 2021 (17 deaths, 11%) continued in 2022 (six deaths, 12%).

The male-to-female ratio among confirmed cases is not significantly different in 2021 and 2022 (1.3 and 1.6 respectively). The most affected age group amongst confirmed cases in 2021 was 10 years and below; meanwhile, the most affected group in 2022 is 20 to 30 years old. Overall, about 71% of confirmed cases are aged 30 years and below, and children aged 10 years and below are disproportionately affected.

According to the WHO/UNICEF Estimates of National Immunization Coverage (WUENIC), in 2021 routine immunization coverage against yellow fever in the African Region for childhood vaccinations was 48%, much lower than the 80% threshold required to confer population immunity against yellow fever, indicating the presence of an underlying susceptible population at risk of yellow fever and the risk of continued transmission. Country-specific estimates of vaccination coverage for 2021 are 54% in Cameroon, 41% in the Central African Republic, 45% in Chad, 67% in the Republic of the Congo, 65% in Côte d’Ivoire, 56% in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 64% in Gabon, 94% in Ghana, 7% in Kenya, 80% in Niger (subnational introduction limited to four counties in 2021), 63% in Nigeria and 85% in Sierra Leone. Uganda has recently rolled-out yellow fever into the Routine Immunization programme.

Increasing population immunity through past and ongoing Preventive Mass Vaccination Campaigns (PMVC) supported through the EYE Strategy, and Reactive Vaccination Campaigns (RVC) have increased population immunity rapidly in implementing countries which has contributed to reducing the risk of spread of yellow fever in targeted countries. This may contribute to the gradual downward trend in reported confirmed cases in 2022, but should be noted that there is also variation in virus transmission dynamics that are difficult to predict.

Figure 1. Number of probable and confirmed yellow fever cases by week of symptom onset in 13 reporting countries in the WHO African Region (1 January 2021 to 7 December 2022)



Figure 2. Distribution of reported probable and confirmed yellow fever cases in 13 countries in the WHO African Region between 1 January 2021 and 7 December 2022



Table 1. Classification of reported probable and confirmed yellow fever cases and deaths by country in the WHO African Region, 1 January 2021 to 7 December 2022



Epidemiology
Yellow fever is an epidemic-prone, vaccine-preventable disease caused by an arbovirus transmitted to humans by the bites of infected Aedes and Haemagogus mosquitoes. The incubation period ranges from 3 to 6 days. Many people do not experience symptoms, but when they occur, the most common are fever, muscle pain with prominent back pain, headache, loss of appetite, and nausea or vomiting. In most cases, symptoms disappear after 3 to 4 days. A small percentage of cases progress to a toxic phase with systemic infection affecting the liver and kidneys. These individuals can have more severe symptoms of high-grade fever, abdominal pain with vomiting, jaundice and dark urine caused by acute liver and kidney failure. Bleeding can occur from the mouth, nose, eyes, or stomach.  Death can occur within 7 - 10 days in about half of cases with severe symptoms.

Yellow fever is prevented by an effective vaccine, which is safe and affordable. A single dose of yellow fever vaccine is sufficient to grant sustained immunity and life-long protection against yellow fever disease. A booster dose of the vaccine is not needed. The vaccine provides effective immunity within 10 days for 80-100% of people vaccinated, and within 30 days for more than 99% of people vaccinated.

Public health response
Surveillance and Laboratory.

WHO provides support to national health authorities in conducting field investigations and determining the epidemiological classification of yellow fever cases. A total of 51 personnel from at least 10 countries have been trained to investigate confirmed or probable cases of yellow fever. Furthermore, case investigation reports were reviewed, and feedback was provided to field teams to assess disease exposure and risk of disease spread.
An innovative programme to facilitate the international shipment of yellow fever samples to regional reference laboratories, as well as laboratory testing and capacity building, has been initiated with support from the EYE Strategy.  WHO is engaged in ongoing activities to support countries in the laboratory diagnosis of yellow fever, including periodic accreditation visits and capacity development.
Reactive vaccination

Since the beginning of the current outbreak (2021 to 7 December 2022), a total of 4 385 320 persons have been vaccinated in five countries: Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Chad, Ghana and Kenya, as part of the ICG-supported response. Nine ICG requests for vaccination campaigns were approved for Cameroon (one request), the Central African Republic (two requests), Chad (two requests), Ghana (two requests), Kenya (one request), and Niger (one request).
Reactive campaign conducted in Kembe Satema in the Central African Republic from 2 to 19 November 2022 had 101.7% coverage. Based on preliminary results, the campaign in Bambari, the Central African Republic, which ended on 23 November 2022, had 87.7% coverage.
Final results are pending from an ICG-supported RVC in Niger, which is anticipated to protect approximately 1.1 million people.
Preventive mass campaign vaccination

Most priority countries have conducted a PMVC against yellow fever or are in process. Gabon, Kenya, and Niger have not planned PMVCs, however, they are included in the EYE Strategy as priority countries. Approximately 50 million people are expected to be protected by PMVCs conducted in 2022.
Chad: The country has prepared an application for a PMVC to be submited in January 2023. Weekly risk analysis sessions supported by the EYE Strategy have been conducted since 18 October 2022 to inform the planning of priority areas for the PMVC.
The Republic of the Congo: PMVC for yellow fever and measles integrated vaccination was organized from 5 to 14 August 2022 in 11 out of 12 departments with a coverage of 93% for yellow fever (preliminary report). The final report of the campaign and the mandatory Post Campaign Coverage Survey (PCCS) are pending.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo: Eight provinces have organized preventive campaigns in 2021 including Bas-Uele, Equateur, Haut-Uele, Mongala, Nord-Ubangi, Sud-Ubangi, Tshopo and Tshuapa. Three provinces have been scheduled to conduct preventive campaigns from the end of November 2022 through January 2023, and include Maniema, Sankuru and Sud Kivu.
Nigeria: The country has entered its final phases of PMVCs. In 2022 alone, campaigns have been conducted in Adamawa, Borno (special approach), Enugu, Gombe, Kano and Ogun States. Bayelsa State is planned for early 2023.  The country is anticipated to complete nation-wide PMVCs by 2024.
Uganda: The country introduced yellow fever vaccination into routine immunization in late October 2022. In addition, 10 of 13 million vaccine doses have been received for PMVC, the rest were expected at the end of November 2022 but have not yet been received. PMVC has been planned for late January 2023. 
Prevention of International Spread and Points of Entry (PoE)

All 13 countries that reported confirmed cases have implemented requirements for proof of vaccination against yellow fever as a condition for entry. Ten countries require proof of vaccination against yellow fever for any traveller, regardless of the origin of their voyage; whereas three countries (Chad, Kenya, and Nigeria) require proof of vaccination against yellow fever for travellers arriving from countries with areas at risk for yellow fever transmission as determined by the WHO Secretariat.
WHO risk assessment
Between 26 August 2022 and 29 November 2022, there have been 22 additional confirmed cases of yellow fever reported from ten countries. However, based on retrospective classification of the cases, there were only seven new confirmed cases and one death. Countries including Burkina Faso, Senegal and Togo have reported probable cases that were subsequently discarded, indicating that there is enhanced surveillance put in place. However, there is still persistent yellow fever virus circulation, as several of the recent confirmations have been from locations with little or no underlying immunity (e.g., near urban areas in Cameroon and Uganda; areas with no history of yellow fever vaccination such as Isiolo county, Kenya) hard-to-reach and under-served populations, including children that have been disproportionately impacted.

Based on the current situation of yellow fever in the WHO African region, the risk at the regional level was re-assessed as moderate on 12 December 2022 (high in November 2021 and June 2022) due to:

1. The decrease in the number of reported cases and the increasing population immunity, since there are ongoing and recent preventive vaccination campaigns, as well as reactive campaigns that have been organized in the affected countries, with more than four million people vaccinated in five countries (Ghana, Cameroon, Chad, the Central African Republic and Kenya), and an estimated 50 million people immunized during the PMVCs in 2021-2022 (Nigeria, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Republic of the Congo) supported by the EYE Strategy.

2. There is ongoing yellow fever virus circulation in some high-risk areas, the most recent cases, and outbreaks are reported in areas impacted by underlying risk factors, including gaps in routine immunization, missed special populations (e.g., nomadic or pastoralists and other mobile populations), security and access challenges.

3. Most confirmed cases were reported in the last quarter of 2021, however several of the recent confirmations have been from urban areas and/or locations with little or no underlying immunity (e.g., near urban areas in Cameroon and Uganda; areas with no history of yellow fever vaccination);

4. Case classifications, and response operations remain a challenge;

5. Delays in detection and investigation; delays in the implementation of previously planned PMVC, competing outbreaks and pandemics of COVID-19 and Mpox that are attracting more attention in yellow fever-affected countries, and security constraints in affected areas (the Central African Republic, far North of Cameroon, Eastern - the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Northern Nigeria), population movement, all present risks that could lead to new yellow fever transmission.

The overall global risk remains low, as no cases related to this current outbreak have been reported at this stage outside of the African region. However, there are favorable ecosystems for yellow fever outside the African region, especially in the neigbouring countries in the WHO Eastern Mediterranean Region. There might be challenges in surveillance and immunization capacities due to the potential onward transmission through viremic travellers and due to the presence of the competent vector, if not detected in a timely way.

The impact on public health will persist until the ongoing outbreaks are controlled, vaccination coverage is high and immunity gaps in the population are closed. The importation of cases to countries with suboptimal coverage and persisting population immunity gaps poses a high risk and may jeopardize the tremendous efforts invested to achieve elimination.

WHO advice
Transmission can be amplified in circumstances where the Aedes mosquitos (day feeder) are present in urban settings and densely populated areas causing rapid spread of the disease.

Surveillance: WHO recommends close monitoring of the situation with active cross-border coordination and information sharing, due to the possibility of cases in neighboring countries. Enhanced surveillance with investigation and laboratory testing of suspect cases is recommended.

Vaccination: Vaccination is the primary means for the prevention and control of yellow fever. Yellow fever vaccines approved by WHO are safe, highly effective, and provide life-long protection against infection.

The countries reporting yellow fever cases and outbreaks are all high-priority countries for the EYE Strategy. The EYE Strategy recommends that all high-risk countries introduce yellow fever vaccination into their routine immunization (RI) schedule for those aged 9 months (Ethiopia, South Sudan have yet to introduce it into RI). Review of the risk analysis and scope of immunization activities to protect the population could help avert the risk of future outbreaks (e.g. Kenya).

To protect populations in high-risk areas in the longer term, it is important to continue the roll-out of Preventive Mass Vaccination Campaigns (PMVCs) and bolster Routine Immunization (RI), as well as take steps to strengthen the application of International Health Regulations (IHR 2005) and bolster surveillance for rapid detection aligned to EYE objectives.

WHO recommends vaccination for all international travellers, aged 9 months and older, going to areas determined by the WHO Secretariat as at risk for yellow fever transmission and for additional areas the recommendation for vaccination of international travellers is subject to the assessment of the likelihood of exposure of each individual traveller.

Yellow fever vaccination is safe, highly effective and a single dose provides life-long protection.  Yellow fever vaccination is not recommended for infants younger than 9 months, except during epidemics when the risk of yellow fever virus transmission may be very high. The risks and benefits of vaccination in this age group should be carefully considered before vaccination. The vaccine should be used with caution during pregnancy or breastfeeding. However, pregnant or breastfeeding women may be vaccinated during epidemics or if travel to a country or area with a risk of transmission is unavoidable.

According to the provisions of the International Health Regulations (IHR), any country may decide to implement the requirement for proof of vaccination against yellow fever for arriving travellers. For international travel purposes, the proof of vaccination against yellow fever is only valid if recorded in the International Certificate of Vaccination or Prophylaxis. The International Certificate of Vaccination or Prophylaxis becomes valid 10 days after vaccination against yellow fever and extends for the life of the person vaccinated with a WHO-approved vaccine. A booster dose of the yellow fever vaccine cannot be required of international travellers as a condition of entry.

Vector control: In urban centres, targeted vector control measures are also helpful to interrupt transmission. As a general precaution, WHO recommends avoidance of mosquito bites, including the use of repellents and insecticide-treated mosquito nets. The highest risk for transmission of yellow fever virus is during the day and early evening.

Risk communication: WHO encourages its Member States to take all actions necessary to keep travellers well informed of risks and preventive measures including vaccination. Travellers should be made aware of yellow fever symptoms and signs and instructed to rapidly seek medical advice if presenting signs and symptoms suggestive of yellow fever infection. Infected returning travellers may pose a risk for the establishment of local cycles of yellow fever transmission in areas where a competent vector is present.

International travel and trade: WHO advises against the application of any travel or trade restrictions to the Region. 

The updated areas at-risk for yellow fever transmission and the related recommendations for vaccination of international travellers were updated by WHO on 1 July 2020; the map of revised areas at risk and yellow fever vaccination recommendations is available on the WHO International Travel and Health website.



Situation at a glance
On 12 November 2022, Indonesia’s Ministry of Health notified WHO of a confirmed case of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) with acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) from Pidie district in Aceh province. Field investigations were immediately launched by local and national public health authorities, with support from partners of the Global Polio Eradication Initiative. On 28 November, the Ministry of Health launched an immunization campaign for children under the age of 13 years in the affected areas.
Description of the situation

On 12 November 2022, Indonesia’s Ministry of Health notified WHO of a confirmed case of VDPV2. The case was a   7-year-old boy from Pidie district in Aceh province, who developed AFP on 9 October 2022. The case had not received oral polio vaccine (OPV) or inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) and had no travel history or contact with those who had traveled. On 25 November 2022, three more genetically related isolates of cVDPV2 were reported based on the laboratory results of stool samples taken from three healthy children who were in the same community but not close contacts of the confirmed case. Sequencing results from Biofarma lab showed 25 nucleotide changes for the AFP case and 25 to 26 nucleotide changes for the three asymptomatic children. These results are evidence of transmission of the virus and meets the criteria to be classified as circulating VDPV2 (cVDPV2). In the past in Indonesia, a cVDPV type 1 outbreak was reported in Papua province in 2019. 

Aceh province has very low polio vaccination coverage in the routine immunization programme; however, coverage is also low in several other provinces in Indonesia, including three provinces nearby Aceh (North Sumatera, West Sumatera and Riau). In 2021, in Aceh province, bivalent oral polio vaccine (OPV3) coverage was 50.9%, and IPV 28.2%. and for Pidie district the coverage was 17.7% for OPV3 and 0.5% for IPV. There is low population immunity against all polioviruses but primarily type 2 in children born after the switch from the trivalent to bivalent OPV in April 2016.

Epidemiology
Polio is a highly infectious disease that largely affects children under five years of age, causing permanent paralysis (approximately 1 in 200 infections) or death (2-10% of those paralyzed).

The virus is transmitted by person-to-person, mainly through the fecal-oral route or, less frequently, by a common vehicle (e.g., contaminated water or food) and multiplies in the intestine, from where it can invade the nervous system and cause paralysis.

The incubation period is usually 7–10 days but can range from 4–35 days. Up to 90% of those infected are either asymptomatic or experience mild symptoms and the disease usually goes unrecognized.

Vaccine-derived poliovirus is a well-documented strain of poliovirus mutated from the strain originally contained in OPV. OPV contains a live, weakened form of poliovirus that replicates in the intestine for a limited period, thereby developing immunity by building up antibodies. On rare occasions, when replicating in the gastrointestinal tract, OPV strains genetically change and may spread in communities that are not fully vaccinated against polio, especially in areas where there is poor hygiene, poor sanitation, or overcrowding. The lower the population immunity, the longer this virus survives and the more genetic changes it undergoes.

In very rare instances, the vaccine-derived virus can genetically change into a form that can cause paralysis as does the wild poliovirus – this is what is known as a vaccine-derived poliovirus (VDPV). The detection of VDPV in at least two different sources and at least two months apart, that are genetically linked, showing evidence of transmission in the community, should be classified as ‘circulating’ vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2). Circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 continues to affect different areas of the world, notably in the African Region.

Public health response
The Ministry of Health has publicly announced the outbreak, and on 28 November, immunization campaigns were launched for 1.2 million children under the age of 13 years in the province of Aceh.

Risk assessment and field investigations were immediately launched and are still ongoing by the local and national public health authorities, with support from the Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI) partners, including a more detailed assessment of the origin of the isolated viruses.

The Ministry of Health, with support from WHO, UNICEF and other partners, is undertaking strong measures to stop the transmission. Measures include enhanced surveillance- active search for AFP cases at health facilities and communities, assessment of OPV/IPV coverage through a rapid community survey in a sample of 200 households, and training on the surveillance guidelines for the use of novel oral polio vaccine type 2 (nOPV2).

The WHO Director General approved the release of the nOPV2 for rapid response on 25 November 2022 and a rapid vaccination response was initiated on 28 November in Pidie district (the affected district) with approximately 95 603 children aged under 13 years to be vaccinated.

A rapid response vaccination campaign was launched in Aceh province for those aged zero to 12 years on 5 December 2022. Large-scale supplementary immunization activities (SIAs) with nOPV2 are proposed for those aged zero to 12 years in Aceh and zero to four years in North Sumatera, West Sumatra, and Riau in the first week of January 2023 and the first week of February 2023.

Advocacy campaigns, risk communication messaging, and social mobilization have been implemented.

WHO risk assessment
WHO assesses the risk to be high at the national level due to low polio vaccination coverage in Aceh and other provinces in Indonesia, the susceptibility of the population to poliovirus type 2 after switching from trivalent oral polio vaccine (tOVP) to bOPV in April 2016 combined with low uptake of inactivated polio vaccine (IPV), sub-optimal surveillance capacity, and vaccine hesitancy among the at-risk population.

The detection of cVDPVs highlights the importance of maintaining high levels of routine vaccination coverage everywhere to minimize the risk and consequences of the circulation of any poliovirus, as well as the need to ensure quality surveillance for early detection of any poliovirus. 

WHO advice
It is important that all countries, in particular those with frequent travel and contacts with polio-affected countries and areas, strengthen surveillance for AFP cases and commence any planned expansion of environmental surveillance in order to rapidly detect any new virus importation and to facilitate a rapid response. Countries, territories and areas should also maintain uniformly high routine immunization coverage at the district level to minimize the consequences of any new virus introduction.

WHO’s International travel and health recommends that all travellers to polio-affected areas be fully vaccinated against polio.

As per the advice of the Emergency Committee convened under the International Health Regulations (2005) on the international spread of poliovirus, countries affected by poliovirus transmission are subject to Temporary Recommendations. To comply with the Temporary Recommendations issued under the PHEIC, any country that have had an importation of cVDPV2 with local transmission should (i) declare the outbreak as a national public health emergency (ii) encourage residents and long-term visitors to receive a dose of IPV four weeks to 12 months prior to international travel, (iii) ensure that travellers who receive such vaccination have access to an appropriate document to record their polio vaccination status, (iv) further intensify efforts to increase IPV immunization coverage, including sharing coverage data, and (v) intensify regional cooperation and cross border coordination to enhance surveillance for prompt detection of poliovirus, and vaccinate refugees, travellers and cross border populations, according to the advice of the Advisory Group.

WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions to Indonesia based on the information available for this current event.



Description of the situation
GLOBAL OVERVIEW

Current Situation                                                                                    

Since 2021, there has been an increase in cholera cases and their geographical distribution globally. In 2021, 23 countries reported cholera outbreaks, mainly in the WHO Regions of Africa and the Eastern Mediterranean. This trend has continued into 2022 with over 29 countries (Figure 1) reporting cholera cases or outbreaks. As of 30 November 2022, 16 of these have been reporting protracted outbreaks. Many of those countries reported higher case numbers and case fatality ratio (CFR) than in previous years. The average cholera CFR reported globally in 2021 was 1.9% (2.9% in Africa), well above acceptable (<1%) and the highest recorded in over a decade.

This year the number of cholera cases and cholera-associated deaths have surged globally following years of decline. Of particular concern are the outbreaks in 13 countries, which did not report cholera cases in 2021. Of these, some had not reported any cholera outbreaks for many years (between three and 30), and several are not considered cholera-endemic countries.i,ii The current situation represents a resurgence of the ongoing seventh pandemic of cholera which began in 1961.

The simultaneous progression of several cholera outbreaks, compounded in countries facing complex humanitarian crises with fragile health systems and aggravated by climate change, poses challenges to outbreak response and risks further spreading to other countries. The overall capacity to respond to the multiple and simultaneous outbreaks is strained due to the global lack of resources, including the oral cholera vaccine, as well as overstretched public health and medical personnel, who are often dealing with multiple disease outbreaks at the same time.  

Figure-1: Incidence of cholera casesiii(including estimated cases of acute watery diarrhoea (AWD)iv)  per 100,000 population reported to WHO from 1 January to 30 November 2022v Note: countries in white did not report any cholera cases in 2022 
Figure-2: Cholera cases* reported to WHO by year and continent, global CFR, 1989-2021**



* In 2017 and 2019, Yemen accounted for 84% and 93% of all cholera cases respectively (Weekly Epidemiological Report 2018, 2020).
**The data for 2022 is not included in the epidemic curve due to (i) incompleteness (data available until 30 November 2022), (ii) provisional estimates. Official reporting of case counts per country to WHO is expected at the end of the year.
To note: data on cholera are often incomplete and underreporting is common. Several countries do not have reporting systems for cholera. This is why complete lists of countries with outbreaks, nor accurate case and death counts cannot be provided.
DRIVERS OF THE CURRENT OUTBREAKS AND CHALLENGES IMPACTING THE RESPONSE

The main drivers and challenges for controlling and containing the current cholera outbreaks are outlined below. Yet, addressing the need for,  and lack of funding to prevent outbreaks is critical. Large-scale investments in water and sanitation infrastructure have largely led to the elimination of cholera in Europe and the Americas. Significant investments should support water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) interventions for cholera prevention and control. Such interventions should consider the social context and be supported by the best available evidence and updated models of cholera transmission.1

Climate change – widespread floods and drought
Of the countries that have reported cholera outbreaks in 2022, many are experiencing natural disasters such as cyclones (Mozambique, Malawi), flooding (Pakistan, Nigeria), and drought (countries in the Horn of Africa). Major flooding and above-normal hurricane seasons increase outbreak severity and the propensity for regional spread. The upcoming rainy/cyclone season, which is predicted to be severe, has the potential to spread the disease across Southern Africa. The above-normal hurricane season in the Americas is affecting several countries in the Caribbean and Central America causing major flooding. Post-monsoon season (and post-floods) is usually associated with a cholera peak in South Asia. Additionally, many countries experienced droughts leading to cholera2 due to poor access to water, marginalization of refugees and nomadic populations, and expansion of informal urban settlements.

 Humanitarian crises, political instability, and conflict
Increasing humanitarian crises due to conflict, political instability, and a lack of development are leaving an increasing number of people at risk for cholera across all WHO regions. Of the countries that have reported outbreaks, nine are experiencing conflict or political violence in affected areas (Afghanistan, Cameroon, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Haiti, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Nigeria, Somalia, the Syrian Arab Republic, and Yemen). In two of these countries (Ethiopia and Cameroon), the current outbreak is not affecting conflict areas, but there is a high risk of spreading into areas of ongoing conflict, which would complicate the response.

 Multiple ongoing emergencies
Several countries with cholera outbreaks are also responding to multiple other disease outbreaks including mpox (monkeypox), dengue, chikungunya, measles, and the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. This also strains the overall response capacity to cholera, particularly in countries with limited resources.

Sub-optimal / delayed surveillance.
The lack of data hinders response. There are several country- and surveillance-specific reasons for the lack of data: (1) Countries with inadequate surveillance systems overall; (2) Countries with robust surveillance systems, which only report cholera from sentinel sites or do not include cholera at all; (3) Lack of data sharing; (4) Breakdown of surveillance systems during humanitarian crises and political instability; (5) Insufficient capacity for lab confirmation and use of heterogenous case definitions (eg. cholera versus acute watery diarrhea).

Medical commodities supply chain
At the time of this report, the global supply of cholera kits is depleted, and suppliers are struggling to meet demand. Delays or shortages of medical supplies can lead to preventable and avoidable deaths. WHO is facilitating global coordination and alternate sources of supply are being sought, but these will not be available immediately.

Limited availability of healthcare resources
The number of outbreaks and geographic scope has stretched the capacity of healthcare services to implement a comprehensive multisectoral response. Parallel large-scale, high-risk outbreaks and other public health and humanitarian crises are further stretching resources and limiting the capacity to respond. In addition, the emigration of skilled medical personnel during a humanitarian crisis, interruption in routine health services such as vaccination leading to (re)-emergence of vaccine-preventable diseases, destruction or inaccessibility of healthcare infrastructure, and violence against health workers have hindered outbreak response activities.

Availability of oral cholera vaccine
The global stockpile of Oral Cholera Vaccine (OCV) is currently insufficient to meet all requests for two doses of preventive vaccination. As a result, on 20 October 2022, the International Coordinating Group (ICG) members (IFRC, MSF, UNICEF, and WHO) took the unprecedented decision to temporarily limit all reactive OCV campaigns to one single dose. The production of OCV is a continuous process with around 2.5 million doses produced monthly. As vaccine manufacturers are producing at their maximum current capacity, there is no short-term solution to increase production. While using a single dose instead of two doses will allow more people to be protected in the short term, this strategy has its limitations, and it is unclear how long immunity will last. To solve the problem in the long term there needs to be an increase in global vaccine production. Since the creation of the global stockpile in 2013, more than 50 million doses of OCV have been successfully used in various settings through mass campaigns.3

REGIONAL OVERVIEW

In the table below, some countries under monitoring are described. These include countries with recently reported outbreaks of cholera, countries where we have observed a continuous rise in cases with challenges to control the outbreak, countries with protracted outbreaks with challenges to control, countries with repeated outbreaks in 2022, countries with large vulnerable populations, and countries where insecurity and conflict hinder the response.

Epidemiology
Cholera is an acute diarrheal infection characterized, in its severe form, by extreme watery diarrhea and potentially fatal dehydration. It is caused by the ingestion of food or water contaminated with the bacterium Vibrio cholerae. It has a short incubation period, ranging between two hours and five days. Most people will develop no or only mild symptoms; less than 20% of ill persons develop acute watery diarrhoea with moderate or severe dehydration and are at risk for rapid loss of body fluids, dehydration, and death. Despite being easily treatable with rehydration solution, cholera remains a global threat due to its high morbidity and mortality in vulnerable populations with a lack of access to adequate health care.

Seven distinct pandemics of cholera have been recorded during the past two centuries. The seventh pandemic, which is still ongoing today, is considered to have occurred principally between 1961 to 1974. During this period, following (re)introduction, many countries transitioned to becoming cholera-endemic. While global incidence greatly decreased in the late 1990s, cholera remained prevalent in parts of Africa and Asia.

The global burden of cholera is largely unknown because the majority of cases are not reported, however, previous studies estimate 2.9 million cases, and 95,000 deaths occur annually.

Public health response
WHO is working with partners at global, regional & country level to support Member States in the following cholera outbreak response activities:

Coordination

Providing a forum for technical expertise exchange through the Global Task Force on Cholera Control (GTFCC) coordination, and cooperation on cholera-related activities to strengthen the country’s capacity to prevent and control cholera.
Providing technical support to all ongoing outbreaks (laboratory, case management, OCV, WASH).
Collaborating with key partners (UNICEF, MSF) to coordinate supply and optimal access to supplies.
Leveraging resources to support global monitoring of the cholera pandemic, provide technical support to countries, enhance data collection and reporting, strengthen advocacy, and provide medical and non-medical items to countries in need, especially for case management and diagnosis.
Supporting the deployment of experts through GAVI, GOARN, and standby partners.
Surveillance

Strengthening surveillance including strengthening diagnostic algorithms, use of rapid diagnostic tests, collecting and transporting of samples, and strengthening laboratory capacity to culture V. cholerae.
Vaccine

Providing guidance to identify target populations for vaccination and requesting vaccine through the ICG mechanism, in the context of acutely limited supply.
Supporting advocacy to increase OCV production and engage new vaccine manufacturers.
Working with countries to identify the areas/hotspots where vaccination is most needed.6
Case management

Strengthening case management and improving access to treatment for patients by setting-up dedicated healthcare facilities (Cholera Treatment Centres (CTCs) and Cholera Treatment Units (CTUs)) and training health workers and provision of technical guidance
Infection Prevention and Control (IPC)

Conducting advocacy and resource mobilization activities to support cholera prevention and control at national, regional, and global levels.
Risk communication and community engagement (RCCE)

Working closely with Member States and partners to strengthen risk communication and community engagement plans and strategies, adapted to local beliefs and contexts, to encourage behavioural change and adoption of appropriate protective measures such as vaccination, and ensuring safe food, water, and hygiene practices.
Providing support to increasing risk perception and knowledge among communities about the disease, its symptoms, associated risks, precautions to take, and when to seek treatment when symptoms appear.
Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH)

Working closely with Member States and partners to strengthen water, hygiene, and sanitation systems through multi-sectoral mechanisms, including IPC and guidance on water quality monitoring.
Supporting countries for the implementation of effective cholera control strategies and monitoring of progress.
Operations, Support, and Logistics (OSL)

Working closely with suppliers to secure Cholera Kits, sourcing other WASH supplies, and establishing a pipeline for bulk items.
WHO risk assessment
On 26 October 2022, WHO assessed the risk of cholera at the global level as very high, remaining a global threat to public health and an indicator of inequity and lack of social development. There has been an increase in global reported cholera outbreaks with 29 countries, mainly in the WHO African and Eastern Mediterranean Regions, reporting outbreaks to WHO in 2022 with many of those reporting higher case numbers and case fatality ratios (CFR) than in previous years.

Several countries are in the midst of complex humanitarian crises with fragile health systems, inadequate access to clean water and sanitation, and insufficient capacity to respond to these outbreaks. Climate change and lack of development also contribute to outbreaks, and cross-border population movements. The latter, along with increased global travel following the COVID-19 pandemic, further increase the risk of international spread.

The number of outbreaks occurring simultaneously across all WHO Regions is straining the overall epidemic response capacity. Protracted outbreaks of cholera are draining public health response personnel and depleting resources.

Due to the global shortage of OCV, the ICG recently made the unprecedented decision to temporarily suspend the second dose strategy for the outbreak response. There are also significant delays and shortages of medical supplies that can lead to preventable and avoidable deaths.

WHO advice
WHO recommends improving access to proper and timely case management of cholera cases, improving access to safe drinking water and sanitation infrastructure, as well as improving infection prevention and control in healthcare facilities. These measures along with the promotion of preventive hygiene practices and food safety in affected communities are the most effective means of controlling cholera. Effective risk communication and community engagement strategies are needed to encourage behavioral change and adoption of appropriate preventive measures.

The OCV should be used in conjunction with improvements in water and sanitation to control cholera outbreaks and for prevention in targeted areas known to be at high risk for cholera.

WHO recommends Member States to strengthen and maintain surveillance for cholera, especially at the community level, for the early detection of suspected cases and to provide adequate treatment and prevent its spread. Early and adequate treatment limits the CFR of patients to less than 1%.

WHO does not recommend any travel or trade restrictions on Member States based on the currently available information. However, as the outbreak also affects border areas where there is a significant cross-border movement, WHO encourages Member States to ensure cooperation and regular information sharing across all levels of the organization so that any spread across the border is quickly assessed and contained.



Situation at a glance
As of 8 December 2022, at least five Member States in the European Region, reported to WHO an increase in cases of invasive group A streptococcus (iGAS) disease and in some cases also scarlet fever. An increase in iGAS-related deaths has also been reported in some of these countries. Children under 10 years of age represent the most affected age group. Group A Streptococcal (GAS) infection commonly causes mild illnesses such as tonsillitis, pharyngitis, impetigo, cellulitis and scarlet fever. However, in rare instances, GAS infection can lead to invasive iGAS, which can cause life-threatening conditions. The observed increase may reflect an early start to the GAS infection season coinciding with an increase in the circulation of respiratory viruses and possible viral coinfection which may increase the risk of invasive GAS disease. This is in the context of increased population mixing following a period of reduced circulation of GAS during the COVID-19 pandemic. In light of the moderate increase in cases of iGAS, GAS endemicity, no new emm gene sequence type identified and no reports of increased antibiotic resistance, WHO assesses that the risk for the general population posed by iGAS infections is low at present.
Description of the situation

During 2022, France, Ireland, the Netherlands, Sweden, and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, have been observing an increase in cases of invasive group A streptococcus disease and scarlet fever, mostly affecting children under 10 years of age. The increase has been particularly marked during the second half of the year.

In France, since mid-November 2022, clinicians have reported to Santé Publique France (SpF) and the Regional Health Agencies (ARS), an unusual increase in the number of iGAS cases and the detection of iGAS clusters. Some pediatric cases have been fatal. On 8 December, SpF published a status update reporting an increase in the number of iGAS infections in France since the beginning of 2022 in different regions (Occitanie, Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes, Nouvelle-Aquitaine), mainly in children under 10 years of age. SpF also detected an increase in cases of scarlet fever reported in outpatient clinics in the country since September 2022.

On 6 December, the Irish Health Protection Surveillance Centre (HPSC) reported an increase in iGAS cases in Ireland since the beginning of October. In 2022, as of 8 December, 57 iGAS cases have been notified to HPSC, of which 15 were in children less than 10 years of age. Twenty-three of the 57 iGAS cases have been reported since October 2022, compared to the 11 cases reported for the same period of 2019 (pre-COVID-19 pandemic).

The Public Health Agency of the Netherlands (RIVM) observed an increase in iGAS infections among children from March 2022 onward. Data between March and July 2022 indicates increased numbers of iGAS cases caused by different known emm gene sequence types (the gene encoding the M virulence protein responsible for many Streptococcus pyogenes serotypes). This increase has thus far not subsided. Coinfections with varicella zoster and respiratory viruses were noted.

In Sweden, since October 2022, an increase in iGAS in children under 10 years of age has been noted as compared to COVID-19 pre-pandemic levels for the equivalent period. Out of the 93 cases reported from October to 7 December, 16 (17.2%) occurred among children under 10 years of age. Between October and December 2018, seven iGAS cases were reported in this age group and 10 cases in 2019. According to the Public Health Agency of Sweden, during the season 1 July 2021 through 30 June 2022, 220 cases of iGAS were reported, compared to 173 cases reported in the previous season 2020/21. The highest numbers of iGAS cases, since iGAS became notifiable in Sweden in 2004, were reported before the pandemic in 2018/19 with 794 cases (incidence 7.8 per 100 000) and in 2017/18 with 800 cases (incidence 7.9 per 100 000).

According to the UK Health Security Agency, following a higher-than-expected scarlet fever activity in the summer in England, with a decrease during August 2022, notifications from mid-September to early December have increased again, remaining above what is normally seen at this time of year. A total of 4622 notifications of scarlet fever were reported from weeks 37 to 46 of the current season (2022/23), with 851 notifications received in week 46. This compares with an average of 1294 (range 258 to 2008) for this same period (weeks 37 to 46) in the previous five years. As expected, several scarlet fever outbreaks in nurseries and schools are being reported, of which a number involve the co-circulation of respiratory viruses. Likewise, in the summer of 2022, the levels of iGAS notifications were higher than expected, and iGAS notifications are currently higher than have been recorded over the last five seasons in all age groups (average 248, range 142 to 357 notifications). As of 8 December, 509 notifications of iGAS disease were reported through laboratory surveillance in England, with a weekly high of 73 notifications in week 46 (week commencing on 14 November). So far this season and as of 8 December 2022, the United Kingdom reported 13 deaths within seven days of an iGAS diagnosis in children under 15 years in England. This compares with four deaths in the same period in the 2017 to 2018 (pre-COVID-19 pandemic) season. Antimicrobial susceptibility results from routine laboratory surveillance in the United Kingdom indicated no increased antibiotic resistance. Additionally, laboratory surveillance has not revealed newly emerging emm gene sequence types.

Epidemiology
Streptococcus pyogenes, also known as Group A Streptococcus, is a group of Gram-positive bacteria which can be carried in human throats or skin; it is responsible for more than 500 000 deaths annually worldwide.

Transmission occurs by close contact with an infected person and can be passed on through coughs, sneezes, or contact with a wound.

GAS infection commonly causes mild illnesses such as tonsillitis, pharyngitis, impetigo, cellulitis and scarlet fever. GAS infections are easily treated with antibiotics, and a person with a mild illness stops being contagious after 24 hours of treatment.

GAS is considered a common cause of bacterial pharyngitis in school-aged children and may also affect younger children. The incidence of GAS pharyngitis usually peaks during winter months and early spring. Outbreaks in kindergartens and schools are common. GAS pharyngitis is diagnosed by rapid antigen tests (Rapid Strep) or bacterial culture and is treated with antibiotics and supportive care. Good hand hygiene and general personal hygiene can help control transmission.

However, in rare instances, GAS infection can lead to invasive GAS, which can cause life-threatening conditions, such as necrotizing fasciitis, streptococcal toxic shock syndrome and other severe infections, as well as post-immune mediated diseases, such as poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis, acute rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease.

Public health response
Enhanced surveillance activities have been implemented in the countries reporting an increase in iGAS cases, together with public health messages addressing the general population and clinicians, in order to enhance early recognition, reporting and prompt treatment initiation of GAS cases. An alert has been issued to other countries to be vigilant for a similar rise in cases and to report any unexpected increased national or regional incidence of iGAS infections to WHO.

WHO continues to support countries in assessing and responding to the epidemiological situation across the region and to provide recommendations to the public.

WHO risk assessment
WHO currently assesses the risk for the general population posed by the reported increase in iGAS infections in some European countries as low, considering the moderate rise in iGAS cases, GAS endemicity, no newly emerging emm gene sequence types identified, and no observed increases in antibiotic resistance.

The risk will be continuously assessed based on available and shared information.

WHO advice
The reports of these events do not change the current WHO recommendations on public health measures and surveillance of iGAS.

General recommendations

WHO recommends continued close analysis of the epidemiological situation in countries throughout the European region, which will be critical to assess ongoing risk and to adjust risk management measures in a timely manner.
WHO recommends that all countries be vigilant for a similar rise in cases, particularly in light of the ongoing increase in respiratory virus circulation that is now occurring across Europe.
Given the potential for severe cases, it remains important that GAS-related infections, including scarlet fever, streptococcal toxic shock syndrome, are identified and treated promptly with antibiotics to reduce the risk of potential complications such as iGAS and reduce onward transmission.
Countries should report any unexpected increased national or regional incidence of iGAS infections to WHO through IHR or equivalent mechanisms either as notifications or consultations, as applicable and driven by the decision-making instrument in Annex 2 of the IHR (2005).
Clinical recommendations

WHO encourages countries to undertake public health communication activities and messaging to healthcare providers to ensure proper clinical assessment and diagnostic testing of patients with symptoms consistent with GAS infection, and prompt treatment of patients with GAS. In addition, healthcare providers should be reminded that for iGAS infection, early recognition and prompt initiation of specific and supportive therapy for patients can be life-saving.
Healthcare providers should maintain a high degree of clinical suspicion for GAS infection when assessing patients, particularly those with preceding viral infection (including chickenpox) and those who are close contacts of scarlet fever or iGAS patients. In case of hospital admission, droplet precautions should be implemented. Healthcare workers should always follow standard precautions and perform a risk assessment to evaluate the need for additional precautions.
Healthcare providers should also be reminded of the increased risk of invasive disease among household contacts of scarlet fever and iGAS cases. Close contacts of these cases should be managed according to national guidance. In addition, adequate hand and respiratory hygiene and adequate indoor ventilation should continue to be emphasized as important protective measures during this winter season.
Laboratory and Surveillance recommendations

Clusters of cases of iGAS should be reported to local, regional or national health authorities to prompt further investigation.
In addition, laboratories should be encouraged to submit invasive disease isolates and also non-invasive isolates from suspected clusters or outbreaks to national reference laboratories for further characterization and antibiotic susceptibility testing.
Travel

WHO does not recommend any restrictions on travel and/or trade for any affected countries based on available information about this event.

Situation at a glance
Haiti is experiencing a resurgence of cholera, with the outbreak initially reported on 2 October 2022 after more than three years with no reported cases of cholera, evolving rapidly, and spreading to all parts of the country. There is also an ongoing complex humanitarian crisis that is rapidly deteriorating due to gang violence, socio-political conflicts, insecurity, fuel shortages, and economic instability. This has resulted in limited access to healthcare and essential services, including water, food, sanitation, and supply services. This situation makes the population of Haiti highly vulnerable to the ongoing cholera outbreak.
Description of the situation
Between 2 October through 6 December 2022, a cumulative total of 13 672 suspected cholera cases, including 283 deaths (case fatality rate is 2.05%) have been reported by the Haiti Ministry of Public Health and Population from all ten departments in the country. Eighty-six percent (n=11 751) of all reported cases have been hospitalized. The Ouest department accounts for the highest percentage (89%, N=12 112) of suspected cases. Of the 13 672 suspected cholera cases reported, 59% are male and the most affected age groups are children aged 1 to 4 years (19%), followed by 20 to 29 years (15%) and 30 to 39 years (15%).

A total of 1193 confirmed cases have been reported. Three departments account for 94% of the reported confirmed cases: Ouest (79%; n= 943 cases), Centre (13%; n= 156 cases), and Artibonite (2%; n= 28 cases). Laboratory confirmation was by rapid diagnostic test and stool culture was done for identification of Vibrio cholerae. Of the confirmed cholera cases with available information, 57% are male (n=680) and the most affected age groups are those aged 1 to 4 years (19%) followed by 30 to 39 years (15%) and 5 to 9 years (14%).

As of 4 November 2022, a total of 368 suspected cases, including 14 confirmed cases and 14 deaths have been reported from the Port-au-Prince prison. These cases are included among the cases reported in the department of Ouest. Additionally, as of 21 November 2022, the Ministry of Public Health of the Dominican Republic has reported two confirmed imported cases of cholera, both from Haiti.

Cholera was first reported in Haiti in October 2010. Nationally, a total of 820 000 cases of cholera including 9792 deaths were reported between October 2010 and February 2019. The last confirmed case in this outbreak was reported in January 2019 in I’Estère in the Artibonite department of Haiti. The country did not report a single case of cholera in the three years from January 2019 to January 2022. The current outbreak is also occurring in the context of a complex humanitarian crisis that is exacerbating the burden of disease and hindering response measures. 

Figure 1: Number of suspected cholera cases (n=13 672) reported in Haiti from 2 October to 6 December 2022. 



Source: Haiti Ministère de la Santé Publique et de la Population (MSPP). Data reproduced by PAHO/WHO

Figure 2: Geographical distribution of suspected cholera cases (n=13 276) reported in Haiti, 29 September to 6 December 2022.



Source: Haiti Ministère de la Santé Publique et de la Population (MSPP). Data reproduced by PAHO/WHO.

Epidemiology
Cholera is an acute enteric infection caused by ingesting the bacteria Vibrio cholerae present in contaminated water or food. It is mainly linked to inadequate sanitation and insufficient access to safe drinking water. It is an extremely virulent disease that can cause severe acute watery diarrhoea resulting in high morbidity and mortality, and can spread rapidly, depending on the frequency of exposure, the exposed population and the setting. Cholera affects both children and adults and can be fatal within hours if untreated.

The incubation period is between 12 hours and five days after ingestion of contaminated food or water. Most people infected with V. cholerae do not develop any symptoms, although the bacteria are present in their faeces for 1-10 days after infection and are shed back into the environment, potentially infecting other people. The majority of people who develop symptoms have mild or moderate symptoms, while a minority develop acute watery diarrhoea and vomiting with severe dehydration. Cholera is an easily treatable disease. Most people can be treated successfully through prompt administration of oral rehydration solution (ORS).

The consequences of a humanitarian crisis – such as disruption of water and sanitation systems, or the displacement of populations towards inadequate and overcrowded camps – can increase the risk of cholera transmission, should the bacteria be present or introduced.

A multi-sectoral approach including a combination of surveillance, water, sanitation and hygiene (WaSH), social mobilization, treatment, and oral cholera vaccines is essential to control cholera outbreaks and to reduce deaths.

Public health response
Emergency response activities are being conducted by the Haiti Ministry of Public Health (MSPP), WHO and other partners as below.

Laboratory and Surveillance:

WHO is supporting the Haiti Ministry of Public Health (MSPP) in strengthening epidemiological surveillance and laboratory capacity. Training of nurses and sampling teams have been conducted to perform rapid diagnostic tests in the Centre and Ouest departments.
Given the complexity of land transport, WHO also facilitates the transport of samples to the National Reference Laboratory (LNSP) through United Nations Humanitarian Service (UNHAS) flights. A total of 35 samples from the Nord-Ouest departments have been transported to the LNSP.
WHO is also supporting the Dominican Republic to strengthen its capacity to detect and respond to outbreaks and/or imported cases of cholera in its territory.
Clinical Management:

WHO supported MSPP to conduct field missions to Artibonite and Centre Departments. The field missions aimed to assess the quality of services provided in Cholera Treatment Centres (CTCs), the capacity for scaling up case management, and to determine the needs and gaps for the cholera response.
WHO continues to provide essential medicines and medical supplies to the Health Directorates in all 10 departments by land and air, with 49 tons of supplies, such as ringer lactate, oral rehydration salts and infusion sets delivered in the last 15 days.
In addition, WHO continues to support the MSPP in the coordination and quality assessment for Cholera Treatment Centers (CTCs). Currently, there are 70 active CTCs throughout the country: 22 in Ouest (including the CTC of the Civil Prison), 11 in Artibonite, eight in Sud and 6 in Sud-Est,, six in Grand’ Anse, six in Nord,  4 in Nord-Est, 4 in Nord-Ouest, two in Centre, one in Nippes.  
Access to safe WASH facilities:

Training of the departmental health officials have been conducted on cholera outbreak response at the community level
An investigation of WASH (Water, Sanitation and Hygiene) conditions in cholera hotspots have been conducted.
Risk Communication and Community Engagement:

In Haiti, WHO produced and distributed over 90 000 printed brochures and posters with cholera prevention messages in the Ouest Department, with the support of partner agencies and NGOs.
WHO, in coordination with UNICEF and the Communications Unit of the Ministry of Health (MSPP), developed a communication strategy to support the cholera vaccination campaign.
Reactive Vaccination Campaigns:

As a part of the outbreak response, an emergency reactive vaccination campaign of Oral Cholera Vaccination (OCV) has been authorized by MSPP. The country applied to the International Coordinating Group (ICG) for OCV vaccine provision. The ICG partially approved the request for 1.6 million doses of OCV for implementation of the reactive vaccination campaign.
WHO risk assessment
The current cholera outbreak in Haiti, combined with the ongoing crisis related to gang violence, social unrest, and insecurity, has strained the health system’s response capacity. The overall risk for this outbreak in Hispaniola is assessed as very high, due to the following reasons:

The current socio-economic situation, ongoing humanitarian crisis, food insecurity and poor health conditions are affecting a large proportion of the population, leaving them vulnerable to the risk of cholera infection and recurrence of cholera.
Limited access of the general population to safe drinking water and to sanitation facilities.
Due to violence and insecurity, the public health system and international partners have limited human resources in Haiti, reducing the capacity to respond.
Logistics issues, lack of access to fuel and insecurity lead to difficulties to import supplies and challenges to access the affected areas. Therefore, timely assessment of the epidemiological situation is complex. Additionally, for the same reasons the shipment of biological samples from healthcare facilities to reference laboratories is hampered. These challenges further increase the risk of undetected cases and delayed response efforts. The insecurity and access to fuel hinders the population's access to health care, leading to delayed treatment and potentially severe outcome.
Considering the magnitude and wide spread of the cholera epidemic that is ongoing in Haiti, in conjunction with the complex humanitarian crisis the country is currently facing, the limited resources to control the epidemic, as well as the constant migration flows towards the Dominican Republic, the risk in Hispaniola is assessed as very high.

In the Region of the Americas, considering the constant migration flow from Haiti to the countries and territories of the Region of the Americas, the heterogeneous capacity of the States Parties to detect and respond to cholera outbreaks, as well as the burnout of health workers from concurrent public health emergencies, the regional risk is assessed as moderate.

The risk posed by the event on the Island of Hispaniola (Haiti and the Dominican Republic) at the global level is assessed as low.

WHO will continue to evaluate the epidemiological situation.

WHO advice
WHO recommends improving access to proper and timely case management of cholera cases, improving access to safe drinking water and sanitation infrastructure, as well as improving infection, prevention, and control in healthcare facilities. These measures along with the promotion of preventive hygiene practices and food safety in affected communities are the most effective means of controlling cholera.

OCV should be used in conjunction with improvements in water and sanitation to control cholera outbreaks and for prevention in targeted areas known to be at high risk for cholera as recommended by the Global task force for cholera control (GTFCC). Key public health communication messages should be provided to the population.

Given the re-emergence of cholera in Haiti and the imported cases reported in the Dominican Republic, WHO recommends that Member States strengthen and maintain cholera surveillance in order to prevent and respond in a timely manner to possible imported cases or outbreaks.

WHO does not recommend any restrictions on international travel or trade to or from Hispaniola based on the currently available information.




Description of the situation
Source: Ministry of Health Uganda and WHO Situation Reports

*Following a data reconciliation exercise, one case previously classified as ‘dead’ has been re-classified as ‘recovered’

Since the last Disease Outbreak News published on 24 November, one new confirmed case of Ebola disease caused by the Sudan ebolavirus (SUDV) was reported on 27 November in Kassanda district. According to information shared by the Ministry of Health, the new case was a stillborn baby delivered at 28 weeks of gestation. The mother was infected with SUDV while pregnant and had since recovered and was in good condition at the time of delivery.

Since the outbreak declaration on 20 September, to 5 December 2022, a total of 142 confirmed cases have been reported by the Uganda Ministry of Health. Among them, 55 deaths occurred leading to a CFR of 39%. In addition, 22 probable cases (all are deaths) have been also reported. The number of cases among healthcare workers (HCWs) remains unchanged since the last DON report, with 19 confirmed cases, and seven deaths.

On 2 December, Uganda health authorities announced that all patients have been discharged from Ebola treatment units (ETUs) and that no more cases are currently hospitalized. As of 5 December, there are no active cases.

As of 5 December 2022, out of 2564 contacts listed, 2167 (84.5%), have completed the 21-day follow-up period. There are currently 36 contacts actively being followed up in four districts, with a follow-up rate of 100%.

Figure 1. Number of confirmed and probable cases of Ebola disease caused by SUDV by date of symptom onset, with 3-day moving average, as of 5 December 2022. Source: Ebola Virus Disease in Uganda Situation Report - 69

Table 1. Number of cases and deaths (confirmed and probable) of Ebola disease caused by SUDV, by district, as of 5 December. 

Figure 2. Map of confirmed cases and deaths of Ebola disease caused by SUDV, by district, as of 5 December 2022. 

Public health response
For further information on the public health response in Uganda by the Ministry of Health, WHO and partners, see the latest situation reports jointly published by the Ministry of Health and the WHO Regional Office for Africa: https://www.afro.who.int/countries/publications?country=879.

Following a Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN) Request for Assistance, as of 7 December, there have been 66 offers of support received from 23 partner institutions. Five experts are currently deployed through GOARN in the functions of case management, infection prevention and control and Go.Data implementation. Additional offers of support have been received for the functions of water, sanitation and hygiene (WaSH), epidemiology and surveillance, partner coordination and laboratory capacities. In addition to the GOARN Request for Assistance, partners continue to support the Ministry of Health led response across multiple areas.

WHO held expert consultations to identify candidate therapeutics and vaccines for inclusion in trials throughout October and November 2022 and developed clinical trial protocols for both vaccine and therapeutic candidates against Sudan ebolavirus. The experts recommended that three candidate vaccines should be included in the planned ring vaccination trial: VSV-SUDV from Merck/IAVI, ChAd3-SUDV from the Sabin Vaccine Institute, and biEBOV from Oxford University/Jenner Institute. On 8 December, 1200 doses of one of these candidate vaccines arrived in the country and will be evaluated in a clinical trial.

WHO is working closely with partners on the ‘accelerated campaign’ in Kampala, carrying out Risk Communication and Community Engagement (RCCE) activities. A festive season RCCE plan was developed to orient RCCE activities in Uganda and prevention in neighboring countries during this period.

WHO continues to support the Uganda MoH and collaborate with partners to implement Infection Prevention and Control (IPC) measures in health facilities to prevent onward transmission including development of a national IPC strategy for SUDV response, implementation of screening, isolation and notification of suspect cases and health worker trainings. The IPC ring approach has been implemented and remains in place to support facilities and communities in the event of a confirmed case is reported.

Preparedness and operational readiness in neighboring countries

WHO has revised the prioritization of the surrounding countries after conducting a risk assessment. In addition to the six surrounding countries (Burundi, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya, South Sudan, Rwanda and Tanzania) that were assessed to be at-risk, five additional countries, with important population movements to and from Uganda, have been included, namely Central African Republic, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Somalia, and Sudan.

The Ministries of Health, WHO, in-country and international partners, are supporting SUDV preparedness and operational readiness activities in these countries. 

Summary of the country’s preparedness and operational readiness activities (no new updates for Djibouti, Somalia and Sudan):

Burundi continues to strengthen its surveillance at points of entry and is prepositioning infection prevention and control materials at the district level. The MoH has also received international experts in the areas of case management and IPC. Efforts to scale up the functionalities of points of entry and Ebola treatment centers continue as well as public communication and sensitizations.
Central African Republic is conducting screening and all alerts are being investigated. The national Emergency Operation Center has been activated, and the national Strategic Preparedness and Response Plan is being finalized.
Democratic Republic of the Congo continue to conduct screenings at 42 points of entry including airports, seaports, and ground crossings. Samples have been collected from suspect cases and resulted negative for SVD. The MoH is conducting surveillance, case management and IPC trainings of all staff deployed to at-risk health zones.
Ethiopia has been on alert mode since September 2022. The MoH is in the process of conducting the SUDV readiness assessment to identify challenges and gaps to increase its readiness capacities. At international airport, screening activities continue.
Kenya is planning on participating in a simulation exercise. In addition, a training course was held on case management at national and subnational levels. The MoH has also completed the SUDV readiness assessment and reports gained capacities in response and will continue scaling up its efforts to address challenges and gaps.
Rwanda continues to conduct screenings and investigating all alerts. There are no reports of SUDV cases in the country. The MoH is coordinating readiness activities at national and subnational levels. A trainer-of-trainers workshop will be conducted in the coming week on digitalized community-based surveillance for community health workers. As well, trainings on case management and safe and dignified burial will be in mid-December in high-risk districts.
South Sudan reports having conducted screening in Juba and Nimule. All 28 alerts have been investigated and all are negative for SVD. Rapid response teams and health care workers in laboratory procedures are being trained in Juba and Yambio next week.
United Republic of Tanzania has increased its readiness activities in the past two weeks by strengthening its call centers, and increasing screenings at points of entry. All alerts have been investigated and are negative for SVD.
On 6 December, WHO Regional Office for Africa in partnership with Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention, West African Health Organization, United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, UK Health Security Agency, Robert Koch Institute and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, implemented a two-day public health emergency operation centre (PHEOC) simulation exercise with 36 countries in the WHO African Region, to improve readiness to respond to public health emergencies.

WHO risk assessment
On 4 November 2022, WHO revised the rapid risk assessment for this event from high to very high at the national level, and from low to high at the regional level, while the risk remained low at the global level. As of 8 December 2022, WHO’s assessment of risk remains unchanged.

The risk will be continuously assessed based on available and shared information.

WHO advice
Successful SUDV disease outbreak control relies on applying a package of interventions, including case management, community engagement, surveillance and contact tracing, strengthening laboratory capacity, safe and dignified burials.

Health-care workers should always take standard precautions when caring for patients, regardless of their presumed diagnosis. Implementation of IPC measures in health care (e.g., hand hygiene, training of health workers, adequate personal protective equipment (PPE) supplies, waste management, environmental cleaning, and disinfection etc.) with ongoing monitoring and supervision for implementation is required to reduce risks of health care facilities amplifying the outbreak.

Ensuring the provision of safe and dignified burials, supporting IPC in community settings (including adequate WASH facilities, hand hygiene capacity and safe waste management) and community engagement and social mobilization are essential to prevent and mitigate ongoing transmission.

Upon case identification, early diagnosis and early initiation of supportive treatment has been shown to significantly improve survival. There are currently no proven therapeutics for SUDV but candidate therapeutics are available and due to be used in randomized controlled trials.  Care of SUDV patients should occur in safely designed isolation and treatment/care centers with trained health workers.

Establishing active surveillance at points of entry is an essential component of the outbreak response to mitigate the risk of international spread due to the high cross-border mobility between Uganda and neighbouring countries.

There are no licensed vaccines for SUDV, but there are candidate vaccines which are going be used in trials.

WHO advises against any restrictions on travel and/or trade to Uganda based on available information for the current outbreak.



Situation at a glance
As of 20 November 2022, a total of 52 807 laboratory-confirmed dengue cases and 230 related deaths have been reported by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare of Bangladesh since 1 January 2022 with a case fatality rate (CFR) of 0.44%. Dengue is endemic in Bangladesh however a surge of cases started in June 2022. Currently, all eight divisions in the country are reporting cases and deaths. This is the second-largest outbreak since 2000, with the largest having occurred in 2019. The current dengue outbreak is unusual in its scale and seasonality.
Description of the situation

Between 1 January and 20 November 2022, a total of 52 807 dengue cases including 230 related deaths (case fatality rate = 0.44%) were reported by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (MOHFW) (Figure 1). The cases were confirmed either by non-structural protein (NS1) diagnostic kits or by Immunoglobulin M (IgM) tests. According to information available for 40% of reported cases (n=20 982) the median age is 25 years (range: 0 – 89) with males accounting for 60% of the cases. This is the second highest annual number of cases since 2000, the highest having occurred in 2019, when 101 354 cases including 164 deaths were reported (Figure 2 & 3).

The most affected division is Dhaka, accounting for 70.6% of cases and 60.4% of deaths. Dhaka city, the largest city in Bangladesh, located in Dhaka division, has reported 64.5% (n= 34 071) of the total number of cases. Other affected divisions include Chattogram division (13.2% of cases and 24.8% of deaths) and Khulna division (5.5% of cases and 4.8% of deaths) (Figure 4).

The high incidence of dengue cases this year is taking place in the context of an unusual amount of rainfall since June 2022, accompanied by high temperatures and high humidity which have resulted in an increased mosquito population throughout Bangladesh.

Figure 1.   Number of dengue cases and deaths reported in Bangladesh from 1 January to 20 November 2022.



*The data for November is incomplete

Figure 2.  Number of dengue cases and case fatality rates reported by year in Bangladesh from 1 January 2000 to 20 November 2022.



*Data up to 20 November 2022

Figure 3: Number of dengue cases reported by week for the period from 2017 to 2022 (until week 46, as of 20 November)



Figure 4.  Number of dengue cases by district in Bangladesh from 1 January to 20 November 2022. 



Epidemiology
Dengue is a viral infection transmitted to humans through the bite of infected mosquitoes and is found in tropical and sub-tropical climates worldwide, mostly in urban and semi-urban areas. The primary vectors that transmit the disease are Aedes aegypti mosquitoes and, to a lesser extent, Aedes albopictus.

Dengue virus (DENV) has four serotypes (DENV-1, DENV-2, DENV-3, DENV-4) and it is possible to be infected by each. Infection with one serotype provides long-term immunity to the homologous serotype but not to the other serotypes; sequential infections put people at greater risk for severe dengue. Many DENV infections produce only mild illness; over 80% of cases are asymptomatic. DENV can cause an acute flu-like illness.

There is no specific treatment for dengue; however, timely detection of cases, identifying any warning signs of severe dengue infection, and appropriate case management are key elements of care to prevent patient death and can lower fatality rates of severe infection to below 1%.

Dengue was first recorded in the 1960s in Bangladesh (then East Pakistan) and was known as “Dacca fever”. The establishment of the Aedes aegypti mosquito vector and urban cycles have made dengue endemic in Bangladesh. The growth factor of dengue cases since 2010 appeared to be linked to regional rainfall patterns (May to September) and is coincidental with higher environmental temperatures. Bangladesh’s climate conditions are becoming more favorable for the transmission of dengue and other vector-borne diseases like malaria and chikungunya due to excessive rainfall, waterlogging, flooding, rise in temperature and the unusual shifts in the country’s traditional seasons. 

Public health response
The Directorate General of Health Services (DGHS) has taken the following actions:
Repurposed six COVID-19 dedicated hospitals in Dhaka city for dengue case management
Established dedicated dengue wards/dengue corners in Medical College hospitals
Activated Control Rooms in all district and Medical College hospitals for sharing awareness information and situation update with the stakeholders (including media and local leaders) to access the information locally available
Conducted capacity-building activity on clinical case management by the inhouse trained facilitators at DGHS and trained 250 doctors and 300 nurses on clinical case management. 
The MOHFW and WHO distributed a total of 284 000 non-structural protein (NS1) diagnostic kits to all the Upazila health complexes, district hospitals and Medical College hospitals in the country.
Supplied adequate IV Saline and other supportive medicines for immediate response from the WHO-supported emergency buffer stock to health facilities all over the country.
Blood banks are geared towards making platelets available for hemorrhagic dengue patients.
Strengthened mass awareness campaigns – continued awareness through television and other mass media. The local ward counsellors have been trained in community awareness. The City Corporations carried out awareness programme and alerted building owners including buildings under construction to prevent water collection. Fines have been imposed on buildings where the Aedes larvae have been found.
The local government engineering department (LGED) is leading vector control activities including the elimination of breeding sites and larvicidal and adult mosquito control using different insecticides such as Temephos and Deltamethrin among others.
WHO supported pre-monsoon entomological survey through DFC, and is providing technical guidance to the outbreak response at the national level.
WHO risk assessment
Bangladesh experienced a moderate rainfall during October this year which was unusual (monsoon is from May to September). Due to the untimely rainfall and favorable climate conditions, the density of the Aedes mosquito population is increasing. In addition, many people keep water in different containers like buckets and pots in their houses, enabling Aedes mosquitos to readily breed in such artificial collections of water.

A pre-monsoon survey carried out by the health directorate earlier this year found a higher density of Aedes mosquitoes in the capital compared to 2021. Experts in the Communicable Disease Control (CDC) unit of the Directorate General of Health Services (DGHS) predicted a worsening dengue situation this year in Dhaka city unless preventive steps were taken. The CDC unit revealed its most recent monsoon survey in September and found that mosquito density was twice as high in Dhaka city as in the pre-monsoon survey.

Dengue is a mosquito-borne viral infection caused by four dengue virus serotypes (DENV-1, DENV-2, DENV-3, DENV-4). The predominant currently circulating serotype in Bangladesh is unknown at this stage, but limited serotyping has detected dengue virus 3 (DENV-3) and dengue virus 4 (DENV-4). DENV-3 has been consistently predominant since 2019 but DEN-4 has not been reported for several years.

Dengue virus has the potential to cause epidemics resulting in high morbidity and mortality. There is no specific treatment. However, early recognition of dengue virus infection and appropriate clinical management can reduce disease severity and mortality among dengue patients. At present, the number of severe dengue cases and case-fatality rates appear to be increasing, likely due to late health-seeking behaviour and access issues.

With the receding COVID-19 pandemic, the travel restrictions have been lifted. This has led to the movement of people to and from Dhaka. Although there have been concerted efforts by the Local Government Engineering Department (LGED), City Corporations, and the Ministry of Health towards curbing the dengue outbreak in Dhaka in the past few months, yet the continued movements have led to an inflow of possibly infected individuals with a potential to contribute to dengue transmission cycles. Vector control activities have been less intense in the other districts of Bangladesh.

Dengue poses a significant public health concern for Bangladesh which experiences regular seasonal outbreaks of dengue. Furthermore, the clinical management of people who develop severe illnesses, often requiring hospital care, puts additional strain on an already overburdened healthcare system. 
WHO advice
The proximity of mosquito vector breeding sites to human habitation is a significant risk factor for dengue virus infection. Although dengue does not directly spread from human-to-human, Aedes species mosquitoes can become infected after biting dengue-infected individuals, thus creating a cycle of transmission capable of spreading dengue and leading to clusters of cases.

The prevention and control of dengue depends on effective vector control. WHO promotes a strategic approach known as Integrated Vector Management (IVM) to control mosquito vectors, including the mosquito genus Aedes (the primary vector for dengue). IVM should be enhanced to remove potential breeding sites, reduce vector populations, and minimize individual exposure. This should involve vector control strategies for larvae and adults (i.e., environmental management and source reduction, biological control, and chemical control measures), as well as strategies for protecting people and households. Bangladesh should implement the IVM strategy developed in 2021.

Vector control activities should focus on all areas where there is a risk of human-vector contact (place of residence, workplaces, schools and hospitals). Vector control activities can include covering, draining, and cleaning household water storage containers on a weekly basis. Space spraying with insecticide can be deployed as an emergency measure. Chlorination and application of suitable larvicides/insecticides for water storage in outdoor containers should also be considered.

Personal protective measures during outdoor activities include the topical application of repellents to exposed skin or on clothing, and the use of long sleeve shirts and pants. Indoor protection can include the use of household insecticide aerosol products or mosquito coils. Window and door screens, as well as air conditioning, can reduce the probability of mosquitoes entering the house. Insecticide-treated nets offer good protection to people against mosquito bites while sleeping during the day. Since Aedes mosquitoes are active at dawn and dusk, personal protective measures are recommended particularly at these times of day.

There is no specific treatment for dengue infection; however, early detection of cases, identifying any warning signs of severe dengue, and timely access to appropriate clinical management are key elements of care to reduce the risk for severe dengue complications and deaths due to dengue. Case surveillance should continue to be enhanced in all affected areas and across the country. Where feasible, resources should be allocated to the strengthening of laboratory sample referral mechanisms for the confirmation and sub-typing of the dengue virus.

WHO does not recommend any travel or trade restrictions be applied to Bangladesh based on the information available for this event.



Description of the situation
Source: Ministry of Health Uganda and WHO Situation Reports

Since the outbreak declaration on 20 September, a total of 141 confirmed cases and 55 confirmed deaths (CFR 39%) from Ebola disease caused by the Sudan ebolavirus (SUDV) have been reported by the Uganda Ministry of Health as of 21 November. In addition, 22 probable cases (all are deaths) have been reported since the beginning of the outbreak. Overall, 19 cases with seven deaths occurred among healthcare workers (HCWs).

The weekly number of confirmed cases reported has decreased for the third consecutive week (Figure 1) after the peak observed in the week 17-23 October. During the week commencing 7 November, five confirmed and one probable case was reported, including one confirmed case and one probable death from a newly affected district (Jinja), in the Eastern Region of Uganda, which is 80 km distant from Kampala. The most recent confirmed case was reported by the Uganda MoH on 14 November, from Kampala district.

Figure 1. Number of confirmed and probable cases of Ebola disease caused by SUDV by date of symptom onset, with 3-day moving average, as of 21 November 2022. Source: Ebola Virus Disease in Uganda Situation Report - 57

A higher proportion of cases are male (57.5%), and the most affected age group is represented by those aged 20-29 years, followed by those aged 30-39 years (Figure 2). Around 25% of cases are reported among children under 10 years old, indicating potential household transmission.

Figure 2. Age and sex distribution of confirmed and probable cases of Ebola disease caused by SUDV, as of 21 November 2022. Source: Ebola Virus Disease in Uganda Situation Report - 57

Since the last DON published on 10 November, one newly affected district has been reported (Jinja), leading to a total of nine districts that have reported confirmed SVD cases. The most affected district remains Mubende with 64 (45%) confirmed cases and 29 (53%) confirmed deaths, followed by Kassanda with 48 (34%) confirmed cases and 20 (36%) confirmed deaths. Two districts, Bunyangabu and Kagadi, have not reported cases for more than 42 days.

Table 1. Number of cases and deaths (confirmed and probable) of Ebola disease caused by SUDV, by district, as of 21 November. 

Figure 3. Map of confirmed cases and deaths of Ebola disease caused by SUDV, by district, as of 21 November 2022. 

Although there is significant improvement in surveillance activities in most affected districts, contact tracing gaps have been reported in newly affected districts. The suboptimal performance could be attributed to different factors, such as the non-reporting of probable cases, high population mobility including the movement of non-listed and/or missing contacts, and initial gaps in human and material resources. Surveillance strengthening plans have been put in place in newly affected districts. 

Since the beginning of the outbreak, 4652 contacts have been registered, of which 3599 (78%) have completed the 21-day follow-up period.

As of 21 November, a total of 700 contacts in five districts (Jinja, Kampala, Kassanda, Masaka, and Mubende) were under active surveillance. In the week commencing 14 November, the average follow-up rate was 65%, representing a decrease of 26% in the follow-up rate as compared to 91% the previous week. Follow-up rates have been particularly low in Jinja and Masaka, at an average of 42% and 53%.

Figure 4. Weekly average number of contacts under active follow-up and follow-up rate, as of 21 November 2022. Graph re-produced using data reported in the Ministry of Health Uganda and WHO Situation Reports

The daily number of alerts received has not been regularly reported to WHO since 7 November, however, the number of alerts verified has been reported. During the week commencing 14 November, at least 953 alerts were verified (daily average 159), of which 335 (35%) met the definition of a suspected case.

Public health response
For further information on the public health response in Uganda by the Ministry of Health, WHO and partners, see the latest situation reports jointly published by the Ministry of Health and the WHO Regional Office for Africa: https://www.afro.who.int/countries/publications?country=879.

In addition to responding to this outbreak, the MoH and WHO are also responding to an ongoing outbreak of Crimean Congo Hemorrhagic Fever (CCHF) in Uganda, supporting clinical management and facilitating a referral pathway for the effective isolation and treatment of suspected and confirmed cases of CCHF and SUDV disease.

Following a Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN) Request for Assistance, as of 22 November, there have been 52 offers of support received from 21 partner institutions. Six experts are currently deployed through GOARN in the functions of case management, partner coordination and infection prevention and control. Additional offers of support have been received for the functions of water, sanitation and hygiene (WaSH), epidemiology and surveillance, and laboratory capacities. In addition to the GOARN Request for Assistance, partners continue to support the Ministry of Health-led response across multiple areas.

WHO held expert consultations to identify candidate therapeutics and vaccines for inclusion in trials throughout October and November 2022 and to draft clinical trial protocols for both vaccine and therapeutic candidates against Sudan ebolavirus. WHO also requested the existing COVID-19 Vaccine Prioritisation Working Group (WG) to extend its COVID-19 remit to rapidly evaluate the suitability of candidate SUDV vaccines for inclusion in the planned trial in Uganda using similar considerations on safety, potential efficacy and logistic issues relating to availability and implementation. The experts recommended that three candidate vaccines should be included in the planned ring vaccination trial: VSV-SUDV from Merck/IAVI, ChAd3-SUDV from the Sabin Institute, and biEBOV from Oxford University/Jenner Institute. The first doses of one of these vaccine candidates are expected to arrive in the country soon.

Preparedness and operational readiness in neighboring countries

WHO has revised the prioritization of the surrounding countries after conducting a risk assessment. In addition to the six surrounding countries that were assessed to be at-risk, five additional countries are being included, namely Central African Republic, Ethiopia, Somalia, Sudan and Djibouti. These countries have important population movements to and from Uganda. WHO has started to engage with these countries and will report their readiness activities in the next DON report.

The Ministries of Health of the six neighboring countries (Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Rwanda, South Sudan, and the United Republic of Tanzania), in-country and international partners, and WHO are supporting SUDV readiness actions.  

Burundi is scaling up its operational readiness by coordinating with provinces and districts on upcoming activities such as the reinforcement of points of entry bordering Tanzania and Rwanda. In addition, training of community health workers and health care workers have been on going to enhance surveillance activities. As of 21 November, all alerts have been investigated and resulted negative for SUDV.
Democratic Republic of the Congo has been focusing their readiness efforts on training staff at points of entry. As of 21 November, 98% of travelers at airports are being screened. In addition, the health zones have been strengthening their capacities in laboratory and case management. As of 21 November, all alerts have been investigated and resulted negative for SUDV.
Kenya is strengthening their capacities in case management through conducting trainer-of-trainers and holding a comprehensive simulation exercise with WHO’s support.  Points of entry at high-risk counties have been conducting screenings as well. As of 21 November, all alerts have been investigated and resulted negative for SUDV.
Rwanda is updating its contingency plan to guide the efforts in scaling up its readiness capabilities. Specifically, there are advancements in the establishment of Ebola Treatment Units (ETUs). The Ministry of Health is also reinforcing its core capacities in infection prevention and control and case management. Specifically, WHO is developing and implementing a training package in case management. As of 21 November, all alerts have been investigated and resulted negative for SUDV.
South Sudan has been enhancing its capacities in the areas of surveillance, case management and infection prevention and control. Health care workers at the subnational level have been undergoing trainings on SUDV management at health facilities. In addition, this past week, sensitization trainings for SUDV stakeholders have been completed. As of 21 November, all alerts have been investigated and resulted negative for SUDV.
United Republic of Tanzania has conducted training in the areas of IPC including safe and dignified burials. Health promoters have completed trainings in risk communication and community engagement and in mental health and psychosocial support. As of 21 November, all alerts have been investigated and resulted negative for SUDV.
WHO risk assessment
On 4 November 2022, WHO revised the risk assessment for this event from high to very high at the national level, and from low to high at the regional level, while the risk remained low at the global level.

The risk will be continuously assessed based on available and shared information.

WHO advice
Successful SUDV disease outbreak control relies on applying a package of interventions, including case management, community engagement, surveillance and contact tracing, strengthening laboratory capacity, safe and dignified burials.

Health-care workers should always take standard precautions when caring for patients, regardless of their presumed diagnosis. Implementation of IPC measures in health care (e.g., hand hygiene, training of health workers, adequate personal protective equipment (PPE) supplies, waste management, environmental cleaning, and disinfection etc.) with ongoing monitoring and supervision for implementation is required to reduce risks of health care facilities amplifying the outbreak.

Ensuring the provision of safe and dignified burials, supporting IPC in community settings (including adequate WASH facilities, hand hygiene capacity and safe waste management) and community engagement and social mobilization are essential to prevent and mitigate ongoing transmission.

Upon case identification, early initiation of supportive treatment has been shown to significantly improve survival.

Establishing active surveillance at points of entry is an essential component of the outbreak response to mitigate the risk of international spread due to the high cross-border mobility between Uganda and neighbouring countries.

There are no licensed vaccines for SUDV, but there are candidate vaccines which are due to be used in trials.

WHO advises against any restrictions on travel and/or trade to Uganda based on available information for the current outbreak.





Situation at a glance
From 29 December 2021 to 31 October 2022, four laboratory-confirmed cases of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) were reported to WHO by the Ministry of Health of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. No deaths were reported. Household contacts for the four cases were followed-up by the Ministry of Health, and no secondary cases were identified. The notification of these cases reiterates the need for global awareness of MERS-CoV but does not change the overall risk assessment.
Description of the situation

Since the last Disease Outbreaks News on MERS-CoV in Saudi Arabia published on 7 April 2022, the IHR National Focal Point of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has reported four additional cases, with no associated deaths.

Between 29 December 2021 and 31 October 2022, four cases of locally acquired Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) infection were reported from Riyadh (two cases), Gassim (one case), and Makka Al Mukarramah (one case) regions (Figure 1). Laboratory confirmation of the cases was performed by real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).

All the cases were non-health-care workers, who presented with fever, cough, and shortness of breath, and had comorbidities. Three of the cases had a history of contact with dromedary camels and consumption of their raw milk in the 14 days prior to the onset of symptoms. Three of the cases were male and the overall age range is 23 to 74-year-old.

Since the first report of MERS-CoV in 2012, a total of 2600 cases with 935 associated deaths have been reported from 27 countries, in all six WHO regions. The majority of MERS-CoV cases (n=2193; 84%) resulting in 854 deaths, have been reported from the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (Figure 2).

Figure 1. Geographical distribution of MERS-CoV cases between 29 December 2021 – 31 October 2022 by city and region, Saudi Arabia (n=4). 

Table 1. MERS-CoV cases reported between 29 December 2021 – 31 October 2022

  
Figure 2: Distribution of cases and deaths from MERS-CoV in Saudi Arabia from 2013 to 20221

Epidemiology
Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) is a viral respiratory infection caused by a coronavirus called Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV). Approximately 36% of patients with MERS have died, but this may be an overestimate of the true mortality rate, as mild cases of MERS-CoV may be missed by existing surveillance systems, with case fatality rates counted only amongst the laboratory-confirmed cases.

Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect contact with dromedary camels who are the natural host and zoonotic source of the virus. MERS-CoV has demonstrated the ability to transmit between humans. So far, the observed non-sustained human-to-human transmission has occurred among close contacts and in healthcare settings. Outside of the healthcare setting, there has been limited human-to-human transmission.

MERS-CoV infections range from showing no symptoms (asymptomatic) or mild respiratory symptoms to severe acute respiratory disease and death. A typical presentation of MERS-CoV disease is fever, cough, and shortness of breath. Pneumonia is a common finding, but not always present. Gastrointestinal symptoms, including diarrhoea, have also been reported. Severe illness can cause respiratory failure that requires mechanical ventilation and support in an intensive care unit. The virus appears to cause more severe disease in older people, persons with weakened immune systems and those with comorbidities or chronic diseases such as renal disease, cancer, chronic lung disease, and diabetes.

No vaccine or specific treatment is currently available, although several MERS-CoV-specific vaccines and treatments are in development. Treatment is supportive and based on the patient’s clinical condition and symptoms.

Public health response
Follow-up of the household contacts was conducted for all four cases, and no secondary cases were identified.

For the three cases reporting contact with camels, the Ministry of Agriculture was informed, and an investigation of camels was conducted. The identified positive camels were isolated.

The Ministry of Health of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is working to improve testing capacities for better detection of MERS-CoV during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.

WHO risk assessment
Between September 2012 and 17 October 2022, the total number of laboratory-confirmed MERS-CoV infection cases reported globally to WHO is 2600 with 935 associated deaths. Most of these cases have occurred in countries in the Arabian Peninsula. There has been one large outbreak outside of the Middle East in May 2015, during which 186 laboratory-confirmed cases (185 in the Republic of Korea and 1 in China) and 38 deaths were reported, however, the index case in that outbreak had a travel history to the Middle East. The global number reflects the total number of laboratory-confirmed cases reported to WHO under IHR (2005) to date. The total number of deaths includes the deaths that WHO is aware of to date through follow-up with affected Member States.

The notification of the four cases does not change the overall risk assessment. WHO expects that additional cases of MERS-CoV infection will be reported from the Middle East and/or other countries where MERS-CoV is circulating in dromedaries, and that cases will continue to be exported to other countries by individuals who were exposed to the virus through contact with dromedaries or their products (for example, consumption of camel’s raw milk), or in a healthcare setting. WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessments based on the latest available information. 

The number of MERS-CoV cases reported to WHO has substantially declined since the beginning of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. This is likely the result of epidemiological surveillance activities for COVID-19 being prioritized, resulting in reduced testing and detection of MERS-CoV cases. In addition, measures taken during the COVID-19 pandemic to reduce SARS-CoV-2 transmission (e.g. mask-wearing, hand hygiene, physical distancing, improving the ventilation of indoor spaces, respiratory etiquette, stay-at-home orders, reduced mobility) are also likely reduce opportunities for onward human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV. However, the circulation of MERS-CoV in dromedary camels is not likely to have been impacted by these measures. Therefore, while the number of reported secondary cases of MERS has been reduced, the risk of zoonotic transmission remains.

WHO advice
Based on the current situation and available information, WHO re-emphasizes the importance of strong surveillance by all Member States for acute respiratory infections, including MERS-CoV, and to carefully investigate any unusual patterns.

Human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV in healthcare settings has been associated with delays in recognizing the early symptoms of MERS-CoV infection, slow triage of suspected cases and delays in implementing infection, prevention and control (IPC) measures. IPC measures are therefore critical to prevent the possible spread of MERS-CoV between people in health care facilities. Healthcare workers should always apply standard precautions consistently with all patients, at every interaction in healthcare settings. Droplet precautions should be added to the standard precautions when providing care to patients with symptoms of acute respiratory infection; contact precautions and eye protection should be added when caring for probable or confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection; airborne precautions should be applied when performing aerosol-generating procedures or in settings where aerosol-generating procedures are conducted. Early identification, case management and isolation of cases, follow-up and quarantine of contacts, together with appropriate IPC measures in health care setting and public health awareness can prevent human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV.

MERS-CoV appears to cause more severe disease in people with underlying chronic medical conditions such as diabetes, renal failure, chronic lung disease, and immunocompromised persons. Therefore, people with these underlying medical conditions should avoid close contact with animals, particularly dromedaries, when visiting farms, markets, race tracks or slaughterhouses where the virus may be circulating. General hygiene measures, such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals and avoiding contact with sick animals, should be adhered to.

Food hygiene practices should be observed. People should avoid handling or consuming raw camel milk or camel urine or eating meat that has not been properly cooked.

WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry regarding this event, nor does it currently recommend the application of any travel or trade restrictions.



Description of the situation


From when the outbreak was declared on 20 September until 7 November, a total of 136 confirmed cases and 53 confirmed deaths (CFR 38.9%) from Ebola disease caused by the Sudan ebolavirus (SUDV) have been reported, representing an increase of 18% and 66% respectively since the last DON published on 28 October 2022. In addition, 21 probable deaths have been also reported since the beginning of the outbreak, with the last probable death notified on 29 September. Three additional cases and three additional deaths have been reported among healthcare workers since 28 October, resulting in a total of 18 cases and seven deaths among these workers.

Since the last DON, one newly affected district has been reported (Masaka), leading to a total of eight districts reporting cases. The most affected district remains Mubende with 63 (46%) confirmed cases and 29 (55%) confirmed deaths, followed by Kassanda with 46 (34%) confirmed cases and 19 (36%) confirmed deaths. Two districts, Bunyangabu and Kagadi, have not reported cases for more than 40 days.

As of 7 November, a total of 1386 contacts in seven districts are currently under surveillance, with a follow-up rate of 92%. In the week commencing 31 October, an average of 1586 contacts were followed up daily, a  decrease of 16% from the previous week (week commencing 24 October) when a daily average of 1896 contacts were followed up. A total of 34 contacts developed symptoms during the past week. Since the beginning of the outbreak, 3867 contacts have been registered, of which 2237 (68%) have completed the 21-day follow-up period.

As of 7 November, at least 2835 alerts have been received at a daily average of 71 alerts. Approximately 94% (n=2671) of all alerts received were investigated within 24 hours, of which 1120 were validated as suspected cases. The proportion of alerts investigated within 24 hours has been steadily increasing, and in the week commencing 31 October, nearly all alerts (657/659) were investigated within 24 hours, of which 31% (n=203) were validated as suspected cases.

Since the beginning of the outbreak, a total of 2139 samples were collected (suspects, repeat samples, swabs), of which 419 in the week commencing on 31 October (+11% increase as compared to the previous week when 377 samples were collected and tested).

Figure 1. Cases (confirmed and probable) and deaths (confirmed) of Ebola disease caused by SUDV by date of illness onset, as of 7 November 2022. Graph re-produced using data reported in the Ministry of Health Uganda and WHO Situation Reports

Table 1. Number of Cases (confirmed and probable) and deaths (confirmed) of Ebola disease caused by SUDV, by district, as of 7 November. 

Figure 2. Map of confirmed cases and deaths of Ebola disease caused by SUDV, by district, as of 7 November 2022. 

Public health response
For further information on the public health response in Uganda by the Ministry of Health, WHO and partners, see the latest situation reports jointly published by the Ministry of Health and the WHO Regional Office for Africa: https://www.afro.who.int/countries/publications?country=879.

Partners in the Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN) have deployed staff to support the response activities in Uganda, primarily for case management, infection prevention and control and WASH, epidemiology and surveillance, laboratory, Risk Communication and Community Engagement (RCCE) and Safe and Dignified Burials (SDBs).  

Preparedness and operational readiness in neighboring countries

The Ministry of Health in the six neighboring countries (Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Rwanda, South Sudan, and the United Republic of Tanzania), in-country and international partners, and WHO are supporting SUDV readiness actions. These include the activation of multi-sectoral coordination mechanisms for SUDV; refresher training of rapid response teams; refresher laboratory training; infection prevention and control at health care facilities; activation/strengthening of surveillance systems for SUDV; community engagement and risk communication; screenings at points of entry (PoE) and assessment and reinforcement of case management capacities, among other activities.

Countries are requested to cascade the operational readiness activities to sub-national levels in high-risk districts/states to stop the introduction of SUDV into their communities. A new online preparedness assessment tool has been developed to measure key performance indicators to quantify and document the functionality of preparedness capacities in multiple high-risk districts in Uganda and six countries neighboring Uganda to facilitate real-time monitoring of the actual readiness status.

In addition, external stakeholders in these six countries will jointly assess preparedness. The Joint Assessment Missions (JAM) will evaluate preparedness at the national level as well as in high-risk subnational-level districts/states. The JAM reports will provide a detailed picture of preparedness capacities in all pillars and in all subnational areas that are at risk.

WHO risk assessment
On 1 November 2022, WHO revised the risk assessment for this event from high to very high at the national level, and from low to high at the regional level, while the risk remained low at the global level.

The estimated very high risk at the national level is based on a combination of several factors including the lack of licensed medical countermeasures; the late detection of the SUDV outbreak and its spread to multiple districts (including to larger cities like Kampala, with a population of more than four million people and travel connections to many neighbouring countries); a highly mobile population with reports of some high-risk contacts and symptomatic cases traveling between districts using public transportation; despite significant case-finding efforts, there is a possibility that some contacts may have been missed; reported challenges with community engagement in affected districts; many cases have presented at various health facilities with suboptimal infection prevention and control (IPC) practices.

The current outbreak is the first outbreak of Sudan ebolavirus in Uganda since 2012. Uganda has developed an increased capacity to respond to Ebola outbreaks over recent years and has a local capacity mobilized and organized with available resources to provide a robust response, but the system could be overwhelmed if the number of cases continues to rise and the outbreak spreads to other densely populated districts, as the country is simultaneously responding to multiple emergencies including outbreaks of anthrax, COVID-19, Crimean-Congo Haemorrhagic Fever, Rift Valley fever and yellow fever, as well as prevailing food insecurity.

At the regional level, the risk has been assessed as high due to the lack of licensed vaccines and therapeutics, mass population movements within and across neighbouring countries, along with weak cross-border surveillance that further amplifies the risk of disease spread, and health systems that respond to multiple emergencies.

The risk will be continuously assessed based on available and shared information.

WHO advice
Successful SUDV outbreak control relies on applying a package of interventions, including clinical management, community engagement, surveillance and contact tracing, and strengthening laboratory capacity.

Implementation of IPC measures in health care (e.g., hand hygiene, training of health workers, adequate personal protective equipment (PPE) supplies, waste management, environmental cleaning, and disinfection etc.) with ongoing monitoring and supervision for implementation is required to reduce risks of health care facilities amplifying the outbreak. Ensuring the provision of safe and dignified burials, supporting IPC in community settings (including adequate WASH facilities, hand hygiene capacity and safe waste management) and community engagement and social mobilization are essential to prevent and mitigate ongoing transmission.

Upon case identification, early initiation of supportive treatment has been shown to significantly reduce deaths from SUDV.

Establishing active surveillance at points of entry is an essential component of the outbreak response to mitigate the risk of international spread due to the high cross-border mobility between Uganda and neighbouring countries.

WHO advises against any restrictions on travel and/or trade to Uganda based on available information for the current outbreak.




Situation at a glance
Cholera is endemic in Malawi with seasonal outbreaks reported during the wet season. Since 1998, cholera cases have been reported in the country with significant morbidity and mortality in affected populations, especially in the southern region, which is low-lying, flat, and prone to flooding during the rainy season. The current outbreak, which started in March 2022 has affected 27 of 29 districts of Malawi and represents the largest outbreak reported in the country in the past ten years. The outbreak is taking place in the context of tropical storm Ana (January 2022) and Cyclone Gombe (March 2022) which caused floods leading to the displacement of a population with low pre-existing immunity that now lacks access to safe water, sanitation, and hygiene.
Description of the situation

On 3 March 2022, the Ministry of Public Health of Malawi notified WHO of a cholera outbreak after laboratory confirmation of a cholera case in Machinga district hospital on 2 March 2022.

Between 3 March through 31 October 2022, a cumulative total of 6056 cases including 183 deaths have been reported from 27 of 29 districts in Malawi (overall case fatality rate (CFR) 3.0%) with active transmission ongoing in 23 districts as of 31 October. Five districts account for 79% of the reported cases and 68% of the deaths: Nkhata Bay (1128 cases and 31 deaths), Nkhotakota (811 cases and 40 deaths), Rumphi (783 cases and 13 deaths), Karonga (683 cases and 14 deaths), and Blantyre (650 with 26 deaths).

The outbreak originated in the Southern region of Malawi with cases reported in Nsanje and Machinga districts. Currently, the most affected districts in Malawi are in the Northern part of the country. The most affected age groups are 21-30 years, and males are disproportionately affected. 

Figure 1. Number of suspected and confirmed cholera cases (n=6056) and deaths (n=183) in Malawi by month, 1 January to 31 October 2022.



Source: Malawi Ministry of Health and Population

Figure 2. Geographical distribution of confirmed and suspected cholera cases (n=6056) in Malawi, 1 January to 31 October 2022



Source: Malawi Ministry of Health and Population

Figure 3. Distribution of confirmed and suspected cholera cases (n=6056) by age group and gender in Malawi, 1 January to 31 October 2022



Source: Malawi Ministry of Health and Population

Epidemiology
Cholera is an acute enteric infection caused by ingesting the bacteria Vibrio cholerae present in contaminated water or food. It is mainly linked to inadequate sanitation and insufficient access to safe drinking water. It is an extremely virulent disease that can cause severe acute watery diarrhoea resulting in high morbidity and mortality, and can spread rapidly, depending on the frequency of exposure, the exposed population and the setting. Cholera affects both children and adults and can be fatal within hours if untreated.

The incubation period is between12 hours and five days after ingestion of contaminated food or water. Most people infected with V. cholerae do not develop any symptoms, although the bacteria are present in their faeces for 1-10 days after infection and are shed back into the environment, potentially infecting other people. The majority of people who develop symptoms have mild or moderate symptoms, while a minority develop acute watery diarrhoea and vomiting with severe dehydration. Cholera is an easily treatable disease. Most people can be treated successfully through prompt administration of oral rehydration solution (ORS).

The consequences of a humanitarian crisis – such as disruption of water and sanitation systems, or the displacement of populations towards inadequate and overcrowded camps – can increase the risk of cholera transmission, should the bacteria be present or introduced.

A multi-sectoral approach including a combination of surveillance, water, sanitation and hygiene (WaSH), social mobilization, treatment, and oral cholera vaccines is essential to control cholera outbreaks and to reduce deaths.

Public health response
Emergency response activities are being conducted by the Ministry of Health, WHO and other partners since the declaration of the outbreak in March 2022.

Coordination and response:

A costed national cholera response plan has been drafted to manage the outbreak. WHO and other partners are supporting the implementation of various activities aligned with the plan.
National and district-level emergency operation centres (EOCs) have been operationalized to coordinate the response in collaboration with other health sectors and partners.
 Surveillance:

National rapid response teams (RRT) have been deployed to the affected districts.
Surge staff have been deployed and additional staff have been hired to strengthen surveillance and case management in affected districts.
Active case search for suspected cholera cases is ongoing in communities in all affected districts. 
Health System Strengthening:

Cholera kits and other supplies including oral rehydration salt, IV Fluids, antibiotics, rapid diagnostic test kits, personal protective equipment, tents, and cholera beds have been provided by WHO in affected districts.
Supplies for case management and laboratory confirmation of cholera are being distributed to health facilities and the district laboratories although additional supplies are needed.
Case management has been strengthened through the establishment of treatment structures and the provision of equipment.
Treatment structures have been established in affected districts and private facilities have been engaged to facilitate prompt referrals.
Cross-border meetings are held with health officials in Mozambique and Zambia.
Reactive Vaccination Campaigns:

As a part of the outbreak response, reactive vaccination campaigns of Oral Cholera Vaccination (OCV) were implemented in eight districts (Balaka, Blantyre, Chikwawa, Nsanje, Mangochi, Mulanje, Machinga, Phalombe) between 23 to 27 May 2022, targeting individuals aged one year and older. Cumulative coverage of 69% was achieved but in Blantyre district the coverage was 42%.
In Neno district, two campaigns were implemented in August 2022 with 84% and 72% coverage achieved in each round respectively.
The country applied to the International Coordinating Group (ICG) on Vaccine Provision for OCV vaccines and has been awarded 2.9 million doses for use in areas with ongoing outbreaks. Preparations towards a reactive campaign have been initiated.
WHO risk assessment
Cholera is endemic in Malawi with seasonal outbreaks occurring during the wet season. The first major outbreak occurred in 1998 and was widespread in the southern region, with 25 000 cases reported. The country reported its largest outbreak occurring from October 2001 to April 2002, which affected 26 of the 29 districts, with 33 546 cases and 968 deaths (CFR 3%). A more recent outbreak occurred in 2019 – 2020 with a total of 26 cases and one death.

Since the beginning of 2022, 27 districts have reported cholera cases. The outbreak was largely confined to the south of the country, including the areas affected by the cyclones until after July 2022, when the outbreak spread to the North of the country resulting in a surge in cases. This upsurge in the number of cases is being reported during the country’s dry season when normally there is low or no transmission of cholera in Malawi. The upcoming rainy season in November poses the threat of further disease spread nationwide.

There is a continued risk for further increases in the number of cases and international spread. Confirmed cases had been reported across the border in Mozambique during the initial period of the current outbreak. In late September, a cholera outbreak was declared in Lago district in Mozambique which borders Malawi (through Lake Malawi). Currently, the most affected districts in Malawi are in the Northern part of the country some of which are on the border with Tanzania and Zambia. There is significant cross-border movement in the region with bordering countries and beyond. Given the history of cross-border spread of cholera during this outbreak, WHO considers the risk of further spread of the disease very high at national and regional level.

WHO advice
WHO recommends improving access to proper and timely case management of cholera cases, improving access to safe drinking water and sanitation infrastructure, as well as improving infection, prevention, and control in healthcare facilities. These measures along with the promotion of preventive hygiene practices and food safety in affected communities are the most effective means of controlling cholera. Targeted public health communication messages are a key element for a successful campaign.

OCV should be used in conjunction with improvements in water and sanitation to control cholera outbreaks and for prevention in targeted areas known to be at high risk for cholera.

WHO recommends Member States to strengthen and maintain surveillance for cholera, especially at the community level, for the early detection of suspected cases and to provide adequate treatment and prevent its spread. Early and adequate treatment limits the CFR of hospitalized patients to less than 1%.

WHO does not recommend any travel or trade restrictions on Malawi based on the currently available information. However, as the outbreak is taking place in border areas where there is a significant cross-border movement, WHO encourages Malawi and its neighbouring countries to ensure cooperation and regular information sharing so that any spread across the border is quickly contained.



Situation at a glance
Public health authorities in Spain reported the detection of influenza A(H5N1) in two poultry workers on a single farm, following an outbreak in poultry confirmed on 20 September. Given the potential impact on public health, a multisector response including measures for control, prevention, and early detection was initiated in the poultry farm. The detection of influenza A(H5N1) in these individuals was likely due to exposure to infected poultry or contaminated environments. No evidence of human-to-human transmission of influenza A(H5N1) virus in this event has been identified to date.
Description of the situation

On 27 September 2022, the Ministry of Public Health of Spain notified WHO of a case of influenza A(H5N1) in an individual working at a poultry farm in the province of Guadalajara. An outbreak of avian influenza A(H5N1) in poultry had been confirmed on the farm on 20 September. Nasopharyngeal samples were subsequently collected from all 12 farm workers on 23 September and influenza A(H5N1) virus was detected in a sample from one of the workers (a 19-year-old male) on 27 September. He remained in isolation until 28 September when a second sample tested negative by RT-PCR. On 28 September, samples from one close contact of the case were collected, which tested negative for avian influenza by RT-PCR.

Following response measures on the farm, all workers were tested again on 13 October. Influenza A(H5N1) virus was detected in a nasopharyngeal sample from another worker (a 27-year-old male involved in the control measures including cleaning and disinfection whilst wearing personal protection equipment) on 13 October. He had initially tested negative during the first round of testing on 23 September. He remained in isolation until 22 October when a second sample tested negative by RT-PCR. Two close contacts of his were identified and tested negative on respiratory sampling.

Both cases did not have any symptoms. Samples were tested using RT-PCR at the National Microbiology Center.   

Epidemiology
Zoonotic influenza infections in humans may range from asymptomatic or mild upper respiratory infection (fever and cough) to rapid progression to severe pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome, shock and even death.

Human cases of infection with avian influenza viruses are usually the result of direct or indirect exposure to infected live or dead poultry or contaminated environments.

From 2003 to 21 October 2022, a total of 868 human cases of infection with influenza A(H5N1), including these two cases, and 456 deaths have been reported globally from 21 countries. A total of three human cases of infection with influenza A (H5N1), one case from the United Kingdom in 2021 and two cases from Spain in 2022 have been reported in Europe to date.

Public health response
Coordination and response: A multisector response including measures for control, prevention, and early detection have been carried out in poultry farms according to the Practical Operations Manual of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
Surveillance: A follow-up response including passive and active surveillance of exposed workers and close contacts has been initiated. Excluding the reported cases, all other individuals who were exposed at the affected poultry farm were monitored for seven days following the last day of exposure to infection and have not developed any symptoms.
Laboratory: Virus characterization, and serological studies are in process. The samples from both cases were sent on 24 October 2022 to the WHO Collaborating Centre for Reference and Research on Influenza at the Crick Worldwide Influenza Centre in London, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Infection prevention and control: In the affected farms, measures related to the control of the outbreak have been undertaken, including on-site slaughter of the birds, the destruction of contaminated materials that could carry the virus, and the cleaning and disinfection of the facilities. All participants involved in the culling process wore personal protective equipment.
WHO risk assessment
Individuals are at risk of becoming infected with avian influenza viruses if they are exposed to infected birds or virus-contaminated fomites or environments.

Whenever avian influenza viruses are circulating in poultry, there is a risk for sporadic infection and small clusters of human cases due to exposure to infected poultry or contaminated environments. Therefore, sporadic human cases are not unexpected. The detection of influenza A(H5) virus in nasopharyngeal/oropharyngeal samples collected from individuals in close contact with infected poultry or other birds, whether the individuals are symptomatic or not, is not unexpected. Good quality serological investigations may be useful in differentiating infection from contamination in these cases and allow for a better assessment of the risk of human infection.  There was no evidence of human-to-human transmission in this event.

In the current outbreak of HPAI A(H5N1) on a poultry farm in Spain, both human and animal health agencies have implemented public health measures. Based on the available information, WHO assesses that the risk for the general population posed by this virus is low, and for occupationally exposed persons, it is low to moderate.

WHO advice
The reports of these two influenza A (H5N1) cases do not change the current WHO recommendations on public health measures and surveillance of influenza.

WHO does not advise special traveler screening at points of entry or restrictions with regard to the current situation of influenza viruses at the human-animal interface.

Due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect and monitor virological, epidemiological, and clinical changes associated with emerging or circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal) health and timely virus sharing for risk assessment.

When avian influenza viruses are circulating in an area, people involved in high-risk tasks such as sampling sick birds, culling, and disposing of infected birds, eggs, litters and cleaning of contaminated premises should be trained in the proper use of and provided with appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE). All persons involved in these tasks should be registered and monitored closely by local health authorities for seven days following the last day of contact with poultry or their environments.

In the case of a confirmed or suspected human infection caused by a novel influenza virus with pandemic potential, including a variant virus, a thorough epidemiologic investigation (even while awaiting the confirmatory laboratory results) of history of exposure to animals, of travel, and contact tracing should be conducted. The epidemiological investigation should include early identification of unusual respiratory events that could signal person-to-person transmission of the novel virus and clinical samples collected from the time and place that the case occurred should be tested and sent to a WHO Collaboration Centre for further characterization.

Currently, there is no vaccine to protect against avian influenza in humans. WHO recommends that all people involved in work with poultry or birds should have a seasonal influenza vaccination to reduce the theoretical risk of a reassortment event.

Travelers to countries with known outbreaks of animal influenza should avoid farms, contact with animals in live animal markets, entering areas where animals may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with animal faeces. General precautions include regular hand washing and good food safety and food hygiene practices. Should infected individuals from affected areas travel internationally, their infection may be detected in another country during travel or after arrival. If this were to occur, further community-level spread is considered unlikely as this virus has not acquired the ability to transmit easily among humans.

All human infections caused by a novel influenza subtype are notifiable under the International Health Regulations (IHR) and State Parties to the IHR (2005) are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a recent human infection caused by an influenza A virus with the potential to cause a pandemic. Evidence of illness is not required for this report.



Description of the situation


On 20 September 2022, the health authorities in the Republic of Uganda declared an outbreak of Ebola disease caused by Sudan ebolavirus (SUDV), after a case was confirmed in a village in Madudu sub-county in Mubende district, central Uganda on 19 September.

As of 26 October, a total of 115 confirmed and 21 probable cases, including 32 confirmed and 21 probable deaths (CFR among confirmed cases: 27.8%) have been reported. Overall, 15 cases with four deaths have been reported among healthcare workers.

As of 26 October, 1844 contacts were under surveillance in nine districts of the country. A cumulative total of 3166 contacts have been listed since the start of this outbreak, of which 1194 (37.7%) have completed the follow-up period of 21 days.

A total of 94 safe and dignified burials (SDB) have been undertaken since the beginning of the outbreak, of which 97.9% (n=92) were community burials.

Figure 1. Confirmed and probable cases of SVD by date of illness onset and outcome (dead/alive), 20 September – 26 October 2022.



The most affected district is Mubende, which has reported 54.7% (n=63) of all confirmed cases, and in particular Madudu sub-county with 21 confirmed cases reported (18.2% of all confirmed cases). Since the previous week (20 October 2022), two additional districts reported new cases, bringing the total number of affected districts to seven.

Table 1. Number of confirmed cases and deaths (confirmed and probable) of Ebola disease caused by SUDV, by District and Sub-County, as of 26 October 2022. 

Figure 2. Map of confirmed cases and deaths of Ebola disease caused by SUDV, by District, as of 26 October 2022.



Public health response
For further information about the public health response in Uganda by the Ministry of Health, WHO and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa: https://www.afro.who.int/countries/publications?country=879

Vaccine development

WHO initiated international consultations with vaccine developers to identify vaccine candidates against the Sudan ebolavirus that could be tested in randomized clinical studies in Uganda. Three candidate vaccines under consideration: cAd3, cAdOX1, and rVSV SUDV GP. The clinical study protocols are under review by the ethical and regulatory committees in Uganda.

At each stage of the clinical study, WHO prioritization committee will be reviewing evidence collected on the effectiveness and safety of the vaccine candidates to inform response activities.

Preparedness and operational readiness in neighboring countries

The Ministry of Health in the six neighboring countries (Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Rwanda, South Sudan, and the United Republic of Tanzania), in-country and international partners, and WHO are supporting Sudan Virus Disease (SVD) readiness actions. These include the activation of multi-sectoral coordination mechanisms for SVD; refresher training of rapid response teams; refresher laboratory training; activation/strengthening of community-based surveillance systems for SVD; community engagement and risk communication; reinforcement of points of entry (PoE) and assessment and reinforcement of case management capacities, among other activities.

Countries are requested to cascade the operational readiness activities to the sub-national levels in the high-risk districts/states to stop the introduction of SUDV into their communities. A new online readiness assessment tool to measure key performance indicators has been developed to quantify and document the functionality of the readiness capacities in multiple high-risk districts in Uganda and the six countries neighboring Uganda to facilitate real-time monitoring of the actual readiness status.

Additionally, readiness shall be assessed jointly by external stakeholders in these six countries. The Joint Assessment Missions (JAM) shall assess readiness at the national level as well as at the high-risk subnational level districts/states. The JAM reports will give a granular picture of readiness capacities across all pillars and throughout all subnational areas at risk.

WHO is developing a checklist for community readiness to support early detection and local containment through enhanced community-based surveillance and readiness actions at border areas and communities in neighboring countries.

WHO risk assessment
Uganda has experience in responding to outbreaks of Zaire ebolavirus and Sudan ebolavirus and necessary action has been initiated quickly. The current outbreak is the first outbreak of Sudan ebolavirus in Uganda since 2012. In the absence of licensed vaccines and therapeutics for prevention and treatment of Sudan virus disease, the risk of potential serious public health impact is high.

On 21 September 2022, WHO assessed the risk of this event as high at the national level and low at the regional and global levels. The WHO rapid risk assessment (RRA) will be revised in the coming days based on available and shared information; however, considering the geographical expansion of the SVD outbreak to urban settings, currently the risk can be assessed to be very high at the national level and high at the regional level and remaining low at the global level.

WHO advice
Successful SVD outbreak control relies on applying a package of interventions, including clinical management, surveillance and contact tracing, a good laboratory service, implementation of IPC measures in health care and community settings, safe and dignified burials and community engagement and social mobilization.

Upon identification of a case, early initiation of supportive treatment has been shown to significantly reduce deaths from SVD.

WHO advises against any restrictions on travel and/or trade to Uganda based on available information for the current outbreak.



Situation at a glance
Between 30 August and 17 October 2022, a total of 47 confirmed cases of Rift Valley fever (RVF), mostly among animal breeders, including 23 deaths, have been reported from nine of Mauritania’s 15 wilayas (regions). Circulation of the virus that causes RVF in animals (small ruminants, camels and cattle) has been confirmed in eight wilayas of Mauritania. Altogether, 12 wilayas have reported confirmed human or animal cases, including nine that share borders with three neighboring countries—Mali, Senegal and Algeria. A One Health approach is being used to manage the epidemic response. There has been a constant circulation of RVF virus in Mauritania with the country experiencing previous outbreaks in 1987, 2010, 2012, 2015 and 2020. Regional spread of the outbreak cannot be ruled out given the proliferation of the vector in the majority of wilayas, the animal density, and high human population and animal movement to neighboring countries.
Description of the situation

On 30 August 2022, the Ministry of Health (MoH) of Mauritania notified WHO of an outbreak of Rift Valley fever (RVF) following laboratory confirmation of a case by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) at the National Institute for Public Health Research on 29 August. The case was a 25-year-old male who was an animal breeder from Tintane moughataa (also known as district), Hodh El Gharbi wilaya (also known as region). He initially presented to a health center on 25 August with hemorrhagic syndrome (epistaxis) with severe thrombocytopenia and was transferred the following day to a regional hospital, where he died two days later on 29 August.

As of 17 October 2022, a total of 47 confirmed cases including 23 deaths (CFR 49%)—mostly among animal breeders— have been reported from nine of Mauritania’s 15 wilayas (Figure 1, Table 1). Among the 47 confirmed cases, there are more men than women (sex ratio of M:F cases = 4.4:1). The median age of the cases is 22 years, ranging from 3 to 70 years. Among the 23 deaths, nearly all occurred in hospitals and had symptoms that included severe thrombocytopenia and fever associated with the hemorrhagic syndrome (petechiae, hematemesis, gingivorrhagia).

Figure 1. Geographical distribution of confirmed human cases of Rift Valley fever (n=47) and deaths (n=23) from nine affected wilayas in Mauritania, 30 August - 17 October 2022. 
Table 1. Number of confirmed human Rift Valley fever cases and deaths, per the nine affected wilayas, Mauritania, 30 August - 17 October 2022.



Figure 2. Confirmed cases (n=47) and deaths (n=23) of Rift Valley fever by confirmation date, Mauritania, 30 August to 17 October 2022. 

Animal cases of Rift Valley fever

While human cases of RVF have been reported in nine wilayas as of 17 October 2022, confirmed and suspected animal cases have been reported in 12 wilayas (eight confirmed; four suspected) (Table 2).

An alert of potential animal RVF cases resulted from sentinel herd monitoring which notified animal deaths and abortions in Aioun moughataa, Hodh El Gharbi wilaya. The outbreak of RVF in animal populations was subsequently identified in Hodh El Gharbi and additional seven wilayas: Adrar, Assaba, Guidimakha, Hodh Echargui, Tagant, Tiris Zemmour, and Trarza. Between 18 August and 10 October 2022, a total of 1148 samples of animal origin—cattle, camel and small ruminants—were analyzed. Overall positivity was 24.1% (277/1148). Test positivity by animal group: 5.2% (5/96) were positive by ELISA IgM in cattle; 25.8% (113/438) were positive by RT-PCR in camels; 25.9% (159/614) were positive by ELISA IgM in small ruminants.

Table 2. Number of animals (cattle, camels and small ruminants) tested for RVF and results, by the 12 wilayas with reported cases, Mauritania, 18 August to 10 October 2022. 

Epidemiology
RVF is a viral disease most commonly seen in domesticated animals in sub-Saharan Africa, such as cattle, sheep, goats and camels. RVF primarily affects animals but also has the capacity to infect humans.

While some human infections have resulted from the bite of infected mosquitoes, most human infections result from contact with the blood or organs of infected animals. Occupational groups such as herders, farmers, slaughterhouse workers and veterinarians are at higher risk of infection.

Humans may also become infected by ingesting the unpasteurized or uncooked milk of infected animals. No human-to-human transmission of RVF has been documented. 

Although RVF often causes severe illness in animals, in humans, the disease ranges from a mild flu-like illness to severe haemorrhagic fever that can be lethal. Most people with RVF have either no symptoms or a mild illness (fever, weakness, back pain, and dizziness). However, a small percentage (8-10%) of people with RVF develop severe symptoms, including eye disease, hemorrhage and encephalitis (swelling of the brain).

An outbreak of RVF occurred in Mauritania from September to November 2020, which involved 78 reported human cases and 25 deaths (CFR 32%)[1]. A total of 186 animal cases of RVF were reported: 94 camels, 89 small ruminants and three cattle.

Public health response
A One Health approach is being used to manage the epidemic response, including the establishment of a One Health technical committee for a coordinated response at the national level. In the affected wilayas, coordination meetings bringing together the human health and animal health sectors are held weekly.

The following priority activities are being implemented:

Organization of daily meetings of the One Health technical committee for the management of this epidemic under the coordination of the Ministry of Health.
Organization of in-depth epidemiological and entomological investigations.
Development of regular situation reports.
Sensitization of affected communities, in particular at-risk populations (animal breeders and butchers), on preventive measures and what to do in the event of abortions and deaths within herds, or the occurrence of a haemorrhagic syndrome in a person and active search finding.
Supplying drugs and personal protective equipment (PPE) to health facilities in affected areas.
Reinforcement of diagnostic and management capacities of health facilities in affected areas.
Mobilization of partners for material and financial support resources.
WHO risk assessment
RVF is not unusual in Mauritania. The country previously experienced outbreaks in 1987, 2010, 2012, 2015 and 2020. Transmission can occur through carrier mosquito bites, contact with contaminated blood or tissues, and during the slaughter of animals. Confirmation of virus circulation in animals from several areas the majority of wilayas presents a significant risk of amplifying the disease in humans.

The precarious environmental conditions, inadequate sanitation services in the affected localities, and high animal density contribute to the proliferation of vectors and the spread of the virus. The abundant rainfall recorded this year and flooding in most of these wilayas, combined with the dumping of waste tires, used containers and garbage, enhances the proliferation of vector breeding sites.

The risk of spread at the regional level is moderate. Mauritania is an agro-pastoral country, and the movement of animals in search of water and pasture increases the risk of disease spread. Recurrent cross-border pastoral movements increase the risk of regional spread of the disease into neighboring countries. Fourteen of Mauritania’s 15 wilayas have reported either confirmed human, confirmed animal or suspected animal cases[2], of which nine border Mali, Senegal or Algeria; specifically, the wilayas of Assaba, Adrar, Hodh El Chargui, Hodh El Gharbi, Guidimakha and Tiris Zemmour border Mali; the wilayas of Brakna, Gorgal, Guidimakha and Trarza border Senegal, and the wilaya of Tiris Zemmour borders Algeria. Moreover, RVF is not among the diseases subject to vaccination control of cattle at the borders; and transhumance— a practice characterized by pastoralism and movement of livestock under the care of herders —is frequent within Mauritania and across the borders into Mali and Senegal. Livestock markets in some countries in the sub-region are supplied from Mauritania.

The global risk is estimated to be low.

WHO advice
Rift Valley fever (RVF) is a zoonosis that mainly affects domestic animals, in particular cattle, sheep, camels and goats. Human cases often occur close to outbreaks in livestock, in an environment conducive for local transmission of the virus by mosquito vectors. Most human infections result from direct or indirect contact with the blood or organs of infected animals. Precautions should be taken when in contact with sick animals or patients, as well as with their products and laboratory samples. No human-to-human transmission of RVF has been documented. 

Public health messaging. Information campaigns on the risk factors for RVF transmission as well as protective measures, such as vector control and protection against mosquito bites, are essential to reducing the number of infections and deaths among people. Public health messages aimed at reducing risk should focus on the following: 

Reduce the risk of animal-to-human transmission through safer animal husbandry and slaughter practices, including practicing hand hygiene, wearing gloves and other appropriate PPE when handling sick animals or their tissues, or when animals are slaughtered.
Reduce the risk of animal-to-human transmission from unsafe consumption of fresh blood, raw milk, or animal tissues. In epizootic regions, all animal products (blood, meat, and milk) must be carefully cooked before being consumed.
Implementation of vector control activities (e.g. elimination of larvae in breeding sites), and use of insecticide-treated bed nets and repellents.
Wear light-coloured clothing (long-sleeved shirts and pants) and avoid outdoor activities during times when the vector species is most frequently active/biting.
Restrict or prohibit the movement of livestock to reduce the spread of the virus from infected to uninfected areas. 
Animal vaccination. When implemented before an outbreak, routine animal vaccination can prevent RVF epizootics. Vaccination campaigns are not recommended during an epizootic because this represents a risk to generate virulent reassortments. As RVF epizootics in animals precede human cases, the establishment of an active animal health surveillance system is essential to provide early warning to veterinary and human public health authorities. 

Healthcare workers. Although no human-to-human transmission of RVF has been observed, there is a theoretical risk of transmission of the virus to healthcare personnel through contact with contaminated blood or tissue from infected patients. Thus, healthcare workers confronted with suspected or confirmed cases of RVF should apply standard precautions when handling specimens from their patients. 

WHO advises against the application of any travel or trade restrictions to Mauritania or the affected regions, based on information currently available on this event.



Situation at a glance
This report was revised on 21 October 2022 and the calculated case fatality rate has been deleted as it didn't include all confirmed and probable cases. The Ministry of Public Health of Lebanon notified WHO on 6 October 2022 of two laboratory culture-confirmed cholera cases reported from the northern part of the country. As of 13 October, a total of 18 cases have been confirmed, including two probable deaths. This represents the first cholera outbreak in Lebanon since 1993. Responding to the current cholera outbreak may overwhelm the already fragile health system in the country.
Description of the situation
On 6 October 2022, the Ministry of Public Health (MoPH) of Lebanon, notified WHO of two laboratory-confirmed cholera cases, confirmed by bacteria culture test, reported from North and Akkar governorates, northern Lebanon. The index case, a 51-year-old Syrian man living in an informal settlement in Minieh-Danniyeh district (North governorate), was reported to the MoPH on 5 October 2022. The patient was admitted to the hospital on 1 October with rice water stool and dehydration. Following a possible healthcare-associated transmission, the second case, a 47-year-old health worker, was reported, representing the first nosocomial infection of this outbreak.
Immediately following the confirmation of the first two cases, active case finding in the informal settlement where the index case lived, identified 10 additional cases confirmed by bacteria culture test. In addition, Vibrio cholerae was found in potable water sources, irrigation, and sewage. These positive cultures were confirmed on 9 October.

In Halba (the capital of Akkar Governorate), an additional two cases were culture-confirmed among Lebanese nationals. On 10 October, an additional four cases were culture-confirmed among Syrian nationals living in an informal settlement in Aarsal town of the Baalbek district.

As of 13 October, a total of 18 confirmed cases have been reported. The most affected age group are children under 5 years (44.4%; n=8), followed by persons aged 45 to 64 years (22.2%; n=4), 25-44 years (16.7%; n=3) and 5-15 years (16.7%; n=3). Females are disproportionally affected in the outbreak (72%; n=13). Of the total cases, 11 (61.1%) were reported from the district of Minieh - Danniyeh, four cases (22.2%) from Baalbek district and three cases (16.7%) from Akkar district (Figure 1).

In parallel, sewage water testing conducted in Ain Mraisseh in Beirut, Ghadir station in Mount Lebanon, and Bourj Hammoud also in Mount Lebanon, confirmed the presence of V. cholerae in all three sources, indicating that cholera has spread to two other regions of the country (Beirut Area and Mount Lebanon) located far from the initial confirmed cases.

Figure 1. Map of confirmed cholera cases by district, Lebanon (n=18), as of 18 October 2022. 

This is the first outbreak of cholera in Lebanon since the last case was reported in 1993 with no local transmission documented since then.

At this stage of the outbreak, laboratory confirmation of cases is done by bacterial culture and MALDI-TOF spectrometry which is conducted at the Department of Experimental Pathology, Immunology, and Microbiology at the American University of Beirut, a WHO collaborating centre.

Epidemiology
Cholera is an acute enteric infection caused by ingesting the bacteria Vibrio cholerae present in contaminated water or food. Cholera transmission is closely linked to inadequate access to clean water and poor sanitation facilities or can be linked to the consumption of contaminated food items.  V. cholerae can spread rapidly, depending on the frequency of exposure, the exposed population and the setting. Cholera affects both children and adults, and can be fatal if untreated.

The incubation period is between 12 hours and five days after ingestion of contaminated food or water. Due to the short incubation period of cholera, outbreaks can develop rapidly.

Most people infected with V. cholerae do not develop any symptoms, although the bacteria are present in their faeces for 1-10 days after infection and are shed back into the environment, potentially infecting other people. Among people who develop symptoms, the majority have mild or moderate symptoms, while a minority develop acute watery diarrhoea with severe dehydration, which, if left untreated, can lead to death within hours.

Cholera is an easily treatable disease. Most people can be treated successfully through prompt administration of oral rehydration solution (ORS).

The consequences of a humanitarian crisis – such as disruption of water and sanitation systems, or the displacement of populations to overcrowded camps with inadequate access to clean water and sanitation – can increase the risk of cholera transmission, should the bacteria be present or introduced.

A multi-sectoral approach including a combination of surveillance, water, sanitation and hygiene, social mobilization, treatment, and oral cholera vaccines is essential to control cholera outbreaks and to reduce deaths.

Public health response
The Ministry of Public Health has established a coordination mechanism with multi-sector partners including the Ministry of Energy and Water, WHO, UNICEF, and the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).

Response measures implemented, include the following:

Intensification of active surveillance and case finding in high-risk camps, informal settlements and hotspot areas, including water quality monitoring (free residual chlorine).
Training of trainers for the central and peripheral teams of the surveillance unit was held on 10 and 11 October, and will be followed by training of registered local physicians, hospitals, medical centers and public health centers (PHCs) at central and peripheral levels from 19 to 25 October.
Updating of surveillance protocols.
Designation of nine referral governmental hospitals to act as cholera treatment centers.
Development of a cholera preparedness and response plan, in collaboration with WHO and UNICEF and in agreement with all healthcare partners, that includes the following, but not limited to:
Improving capacity for early detection and ensuring proper linkages with WASH response through the support of integrated multisectoral field mission in the Akkar region.
Circulars have been issued to hospitals, health centres and health workers regarding the necessity of informing MoPH of any suspected case.
Distribution of 1000 Bioline rapid diagnostic tests.
Initial stock of medicines required to treat 400 cases was secured.
MoPH is exploring a potential request to the International Coordinating Group (ICG) on Vaccine Provision for oral cholera vaccine (OCV) doses to cover 400 000 refugees and hosting communities including potential vaccination for prisons.
The functionality of water testing laboratories is being assessed in eight hospital laboratories as a first stage to allow for quick, decentralized case identification in various Lebanese regions.
A crisis cell was formed to coordinate the provision of clean water, water quality monitoring, and access to adequate sanitation, targeting vulnerable groups living in informal settlements.
The associations of doctors and nurses and the Lebanese Society of Bacterial Diseases were contacted to develop training courses for healthcare workers on case management and methods of infection prevention and control, especially within health institutions.
Collaboration with relevant ministries, especially energy and water, interior, municipalities, and the environment, to provide safe water and sanitation.
WHO risk assessment
Lebanon’s health system has been hard-hit by a three-year financial crisis and an explosion at the port of Beirut in August 2020 that destroyed essential medical infrastructure in the capital. In this context, responding to a cholera outbreak may overwhelm the already fragile health system in the country.

According to The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), Lebanon hosts the largest number of refugees in the world per capita and square kilometre, with 1.5 million Syrian refugees and about 13 715 refugees of other nationalities. Additionally, there is a large population of Palestinian refugees that are particularly exposed due to unsafe WASH services in various camps (Beqaa, Trablos, Beirut, Saida, Sour), possibly with limited medical services provided.

Due to porous borders allowing free movement between Lebanon and neighbouring countries, the exportation of cholera cases is highly likely.

The current cholera outbreak in Lebanon was reported six weeks after a cholera outbreak was declared in neighbouring Syria. On 15 September 2022, WHO assessed the risk of the cholera outbreak in Syria and predicted that due to shortages of drinking water and a fragile and limited health system in Lebanon, there was a risk of a cholera outbreak should the disease be introduced into the country.

Power cuts, water shortages, and inflation have strained the already fragile health system in Lebanon. Poverty has also worsened for many Lebanese, with many families frequently rationing water, unable to afford private water tanks for consumption and domestic use.

Since the last cholera outbreak in Lebanon occurred in 1993, there is a need to update cholera surveillance and case management guidelines and re-train healthcare workers.

WHO advice
WHO recommends improving access to proper and timely case management of cholera cases, improving infection, prevention, and control in healthcare facilities, improving access to safe drinking water and sanitation infrastructure, as well as, improving hygiene practices and food safety in affected communities as the most effective means of controlling cholera.

Oral cholera vaccine should be used in conjunction with improvements in water and sanitation to control cholera outbreaks and for prevention in targeted areas known to be at high risk for cholera. Key public health communication messages should be provided to the population.

Surveillance for early case detection, confirmation and response in other provinces and regions of Lebanon should be reinforced especially at the district level while expanding community-based surveillance.

WHO does not recommend any restrictions on international travel or trade to or from Lebanon based on the currently available information.



Situation at a glance
From January through August 2022, more than 3.4 million suspected cases of malaria were reported in Pakistan compared with the 2.6 million suspected cases reported in 2021. Over 170 000 cases were laboratory confirmed, with the majority reported as Plasmodium vivax. A rapid upsurge in cases was observed in Balochistan and Sindh provinces after the devastating floods in mid-June 2022, together accounting for 78% of all confirmed cases. The risk is assessed as very high considering the current flood crisis affecting the capacity of the national health system.
Description of the situation
Malaria is endemic in Pakistan. Between January and August 2022, over 3.4 million suspected cases of malaria were reported in Pakistan compared with the 2.6 million reported over the course of 2021. Over 170 000 cases were laboratory confirmed, of which 77% are due to Plasmodium vivax, and 23% due to Plasmodium falciparum, which is associated with the most severe and fatal cases.

Pakistan was hit by devastating floods in June 2022 which resulted in over 33 million people being affected, 81 districts being declared as calamity hit and the health infrastructure being badly impacted.

A rapid upsurge in reported malaria cases was observed after the floods. In Sindh province, confirmed malaria cases in August 2022 reached 69 123 compared to 19 826 cases reported in August 2021. In Balochistan province, 41 368 confirmed cases were reported in August 2022 compared to 22 032 confirmed cases in August 2021. These two provinces together account for 78% of all reported confirmed cases in Pakistan in 2022. Reports from 62 high-burden districts indicate that additional 210 715 cases were reported in September 2022, compared to 178 657 cases reported in the same districts in August 2022.

Epidemiology
Malaria is a life-threatening disease caused by parasites that are transmitted to people through the bites of infected female Anopheles mosquitoes. Malaria transmission is also possible through blood transfusion, organ transplantation, or the sharing of needles or syringes contaminated with infected blood. Malaria can also be transmitted from mother to child before or during delivery.

There are five parasite species that cause malaria in humans, of which two of these species pose the greatest public health threat, namely Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax. Both parasite species are reported in Pakistan, with P. vivax representing the most predominant parasite (>80%).

The first symptoms – fever, headache and chills – usually appear within 10–15 days after the infective mosquito bite and may be mild and difficult to recognize as malaria. Left untreated, malaria can progress to severe illness and death within a period of 24 hours.

Public health response
The Government of Pakistan is leading the response with support from WHO and other implementing partners. The following actions have been implemented:

Health needs assessment was conducted in July 2022 together with other UN agencies.
Implementation and strengthening of integrated disease surveillance and response (IDSR) activities in flood-affected districts and utilization of DHIS2 tool for daily reporting of diseases.
Mass distribution campaign for long-lasting insecticidal nets (LLINs) was conducted in 13 outbreak and flood-hit districts by the provincial disaster management authority. An additional 600 000 LLINs have been handed over to health authorities in Sindh and Balochistan provinces for distribution to displaced populations in flood-affected districts.
Additional teams were deployed to support vector surveillance.
WHO provided support through coordination at multiple high-level meetings for health authorities, including enhancing liaison and coordination with provinces and partners, and the constitution of a national task force for emergency response.
WHO has mobilized rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) and antimalarial medicines to the provinces; about 230 000 RDTs have been provided for malaria and other diseases including acute watery diarrhea, dengue, hepatitis A & E, and chikungunya.
WHO is supporting the development of a 6-month contingency plan for submission to the Global Fund.
WHO risk assessment
Malaria is one of the leading causes of illness and death in Pakistan. Intense transmission occurs mainly in districts located in regions bordering the Islamic Republic of Iran and Afghanistan and along the coastal belt in Sindh and Balochistan provinces. In addition, there is high population movement between Pakistan and its border countries (Afghanistan and the Islamic Republic of Iran), particularly in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province with over 1 million Afghani refugees. Of these, nearly 800 000 refugees live in districts officially notified as calamity hit by floods, therefore the risk of international spread of the disease cannot be ruled out.

Over 33 million people have been affected by the floods and 81 districts have been declared as calamity hit. The health infrastructure was also damaged with rapid assessments indicating some 1543 health facilities and their contents have been damaged.

Given the current situation in Pakistan and limited access to health facilities and insufficient healthcare workers and essential medical supplies, there is an increased risk of serious health impacts from malaria and other ongoing outbreaks including COVID-19, acute watery diarrhoea, typhoid, measles, leishmaniasis, HIV, and polio. The risk is assessed as very high considering the current flood crisis affecting the capacity of the national health system. Many challenges to response measures surfaced when some flood-affected districts reported a doubling in incidence rates, a high P. falciparum ratio, and limited stocks of emergency medicines, insecticides and supplies accompanied with a long lead time for procurement. The lack of resources to adequately scale-up precautionary vector-control measures will certainly increase the spread of malaria and other vector-borne diseases.

WHO advice
WHO recommends malaria prevention tools and strategies including effective vector control and the use of preventive antimalarial drugs to reduce the global burden of the disease. Also, strengthening malaria surveillance is important to identify high-risk areas or populations prone to infection, enable the monitoring of changing disease patterns, and assist in designing effective public health interventions. Continued delivery of key public health messages on reducing the risk of malaria transmission among the population represents another important tool for malaria prevention and control.

Early diagnosis and treatment of malaria reduce disease severity, prevent deaths, and contribute to reducing onward malaria transmission. WHO recommends that all suspected cases of malaria be confirmed using parasite-based diagnostic testing (through either microscopy or a rapid diagnostic test). Diagnostic testing enables health providers to swiftly distinguish between malarial and non-malarial fevers, facilitating appropriate treatment.

At this stage, case management of malaria represents a critical priority to respond to the malaria situation in Pakistan, including the availability of medicines and RDTs.

Preventative measures to reduce malaria transmission also include the use of LLINs and indoor residual spraying (IRS). Vector control is a vital component of malaria control and elimination strategies as it is highly effective in preventing infection and reducing disease transmission. However, there is a limited number of LLINs available, and the distributed ones are not enough; also, the usage of LLIN by flood-affected people is not high. Additionally, available resources for IRS are extremely limited at this stage.

Since October 2021, WHO also recommends the broad use of the RTS,S/AS01 malaria vaccine among children living in regions with moderate to high P. falciparum malaria transmission. The vaccine has been shown to significantly reduce malaria, and deadly severe malaria infection, among young children.

WHO does not recommend any general travel or trade restrictions to Pakistan based on the information available for this event.




Situation at a glance
Between 1 January and 27 September 2022, a total of 25 932 confirmed dengue cases and 62 deaths (CFR 0.25%) were reported in Pakistan, with 74% of these cases reported in the month of September alone. The current surge in cases follows unprecedented flooding that began in mid-June 2022. With the current flood crisis affecting the national health system capacity and the growing humanitarian situation, there is a high risk of serious health impacts from dengue fever and other concurrent disease outbreaks. High population movement between Pakistan and bordering countries (in particular, Afghanistan and the Islamic Republic of Iran) means that the international transmission of dengue fever cannot be ruled out.
Description of the situation
Dengue fever is endemic to Pakistan, which experiences year-round transmission with seasonal peaks. However, triggered by the worst flooding in the country’s history that began in mid-June, the number of reported dengue cases is significantly higher in 2022 (between January and September) as compared to the same period during the four previous years.

Between 1 January to 27 September 2022, according to the National Institute of Health-Islamabad, a cumulative total of 25 932 confirmed dengue cases and 62 deaths have been reported nationally. Three-quarters (74%) of these cases were reported during the month of September alone. As of 22 September, the distribution of cases by province was available for 83% (n=21 777) of the total cases, of which 32% (n=6888) were reported from Sindh, 29% (n=6255) from Punjab (including the Islamabad Capital Territory), 25% (n=5506) from Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, and 14% (n=3128) from Balochistan (Figure 1).

Figure 1. Distribution of confirmed dengue cases in Pakistan by province, 1 January to 22 September 2022.

Epidemiology
Dengue is a viral infection transmitted by mosquitoes caused by four types of dengue virus (DENV 1, DENV 2, DENV 3, DENV 4). Infection with one serotype provides long-term immunity to the homologous serotype, but not to other serotypes; sequential infections put people at greater risk of severe dengue. DENV can cause an acute flu-like illness, many DENV infections produce only mild illness; over 80% of cases are asymptomatic.

There is no specific treatment for dengue, however, timely detection of cases, identifying any warning signs of severe dengue infection, and appropriate case management are key elements of care to prevent patient death and can lower fatality rates of severe infection to below 1%.

Dengue fever is endemic in Pakistan, with seasonal outbreaks and the circulation of the four serotypes in different areas of the country. Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus are widely adapted vectors for urban and peri-urban environments. As dengue is recurrent in the country, the population may be at risk of re-infection and therefore, serious complications may occur if not managed promptly and correctly.
Public health response
The Ministry of Health, in collaboration with the Global Fund, is conducting vector surveillance and control activities as a part of Integrated Vector Management, including:

Technical weekly committee meetings chaired by the Ministry of Health.
Activation of ‘dengue counters’ in all health facilities; designated areas in emergency departments allocated for receiving suspected dengue cases.
Enhancement of vector surveillance activities in Lahore and other districts.
Provision of additional teams to support vector surveillance activities including the daily situation analysis.
The WHO is providing support including:

Coordination at multiple high-level meetings for health authorities including visits and meetings of the WHO representative.
Strengthening of laboratory and hospital-based disease surveillance across all provinces in the country has been initiated.
Training of selected health care providers from all provinces in the country is being held on case management of dengue fever.
Training on vector surveillance and vector control including source reduction during house visits is underway.
Provision of 230 000 rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) for dengue and other diseases, including malaria, acute watery diarrhoea, chikungunya, hepatitis A and E.
WHO risk assessment
Pakistan is experiencing an abnormal monsoon rainfall and unprecedented floods. One-third of the country and an estimated 33 million people have been impacted in 84 calamity declared districts. More than 2 million houses have been destroyed and an estimated 1460 health facilities have also reportedly been damaged. Some 7.9 million people are reportedly displaced, 12 900 people injured, and 1600 people have died. Heavy rains and floods have left millions of people without access to healthcare and medical treatment.

With the current flood crisis affecting the national health system capacity, there is a high risk of serious health impacts from dengue fever.  Currently, there is a need for improved vector surveillance, enhanced laboratory capacity for better detection, sensitization of health care providers on case management (including warning signs of severe dengue) and improved surveillance of acute febrile illness to better define disease burden and seasonality patterns.

Vector-borne epidemics – including dengue – after flooding is a well-known phenomenon, as the stagnant water provides favorable habitats for mosquitoes to breed. The lag time is usually around 3-4 weeks before the occurrence of dengue cases.

Ongoing disease outbreaks in Pakistan, including acute watery diarrhoea, dengue, malaria, measles, polio, and COVID-19 are being further aggravated, particularly in internally displaced persons and refugee camps and where water and sanitation facilities have been damaged.

Dengue fever is the most rapidly spreading mosquito-borne virus infection in the world. There is high population movement between Pakistan—in particular, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province— and bordering countries, especially the Islamic Republic of Iran and Afghanistan. Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province is also home to 1 200 000 Afghani refugees, of which 800 000 live in districts officially notified as calamity hit by floods. The transmission of dengue fever from Pakistan to border countries cannot be ruled out.

WHO advice
The proximity of mosquito vector breeding sites to human habitation is a significant risk factor for dengue virus infection. There is no specific treatment for dengue infection, but early detection and access to appropriate healthcare reduce mortality. Furthermore, the prevention and control of dengue depend on effective vector surveillance and control. 

WHO promotes the strategic approach known as Integrated Vector Management (IVM) to control mosquito activity and population, including Aedes spp. (the vector of dengue). 

IVM activities should be enhanced to remove potential breeding sites, reduce vector populations, and minimize individual exposure. This should involve vector control strategies for larvae and adults (i.e. environmental management and source reduction, and chemical control measures), as well as strategies for protecting people and households. Vector control activities should focus on all areas where there is human-vector contact (place of residence, workplaces, schools and hospitals). 

Vector control activities can include covering, draining and cleaning household water storage containers on a weekly basis. In addition, this may include chlorination of drinking water and application of suitable larvicides/insecticides for water storage in outdoor containers. 

Where indoor biting occurs, application of mosquito repellent lotion or sprays on the skin, use of household insecticide aerosol products, mosquito coils, or other insecticide vaporizers are recommended. Household fixtures such as window and door screens and air conditioning can also reduce bites. Since Aedes spp mosquitoes (the primary vector for transmission) are day biters with peak activity at dawn and dusk, personal protective measures such as the use of clothing to minimize skin exposure are recommended. During outdoor activities, mosquito repellents may be applied to exposed skin or to clothing. Insecticide-treated nets offer good protection to people who sleep outside or during the day (e.g. infants, people confined to bed, and night workers) and at night to prevent mosquito bites. 

In addition, vector and human case surveillance should continue to be enhanced in all affected areas and across the country. Key public health messages on reducing the risk of dengue transmission among the population are expected to continue to be provided. 

WHO does not recommend any general travel or trade restrictions to Pakistan based on the information available for this event.




Situation at a glance
After more than 3 years with no reported cases of cholera in Haiti, on 2 October 2022, the national authorities reported two confirmed cases of Vibrio cholerae O1 in the greater Port-au-Prince area. The current cholera outbreak is taking place in Port-au-Prince and Cité Soleil. These are areas that are experiencing civil unrest with several thousand people having been displaced as a result of the increase in violence.
Description of the situation
Between 25 September and 8 October 2022, the Haiti Ministry of Public Health and Population (MSPP per its acronym in French) reported 32 laboratory-confirmed cases of Vibrio cholerae (including two identified as serogroup O1), and 224 suspected cases from Port-au-Prince and Cité Soleil. A total of 189 cases have been hospitalized, of which 16 deaths have been reported. Of the total reported cases, 55% are males and 49% are aged 19 years or younger. The most affected age group is 1 to 4-year-olds (Figure 3).







The first cholera outbreak was reported in Haiti in October 2010. Nationally, a total of 820 000 cases of cholera including 9792 deaths were reported between October 2010 and February 2019 (Figure 4). The last confirmed case of cholera was reported in January 2019 in I’Estère in the Artibonite department of Haiti. The country did not report a single confirmed case of cholera in the three years from January 2019 to January 2022.



Epidemiology
Cholera is an acute enteric infection caused by ingesting the bacteria Vibrio cholerae present in contaminated water or food. It is mainly linked to inadequate sanitation and insufficient access to safe drinking water. It is an extremely virulent disease that can cause severe acute watery diarrhoea resulting in high morbidity and mortality, and can spread rapidly, depending on the frequency of exposure, the exposed population and the setting. Cholera affects both children and adults and can be fatal if untreated.

The incubation period is between 12 hours and five days after ingestion of contaminated food or water. Most people infected with V. cholerae do not develop any symptoms, although the bacteria are present in their faeces for 1-10 days after infection and are shed back into the environment, potentially infecting other people. Among people who develop symptoms, the majority have mild or moderate symptoms, while a minority develop acute watery diarrhoea with severe dehydration. Cholera is an easily treatable disease. Most people can be treated successfully through prompt administration of oral rehydration solution (ORS).

The consequences of a humanitarian crisis – such as disruption of water and sanitation systems, or the displacement of populations to inadequate and overcrowded camps – can increase the risk of cholera transmission, should the bacteria be present or introduced.

A multisectoral approach including a combination of surveillance, water, sanitation and hygiene, social mobilization, treatment, and oral cholera vaccines is essential to control cholera outbreaks and to reduce deaths.

Public health response
Emergency response activities are being conducted by the Ministry of Health, WHO and other partners as below.

The Incident Management Support Team (IMST) has been activated for outbreak response activities
Regular epidemiological alerts are being published by WHO for enhanced information sharing and wider community awareness about the current epidemiological situation.
Updated information on the event has been provided to the other Member States through the International Health Regulations (IHR) National Focal Points (NFPs) network.
Support has been provided to Haiti health authorities for control and response actions as well as resources such as cholera kits.
Event-based surveillance has been strengthened to monitor official and unofficial reports for information regarding the local situation.
The multisectoral response plan has been developed with a focus on case management, water, hygiene and sanitation (WASH), vaccination, communication and psychosocial support, strengthening preparedness in unaffected departments, and advocating to improve security conditions to facilitate the response.
WHO is working in coordination with the public health authorities to characterize this event and support the response.
WHO risk assessment
The current cholera outbreak in Haiti, combined with the ongoing crisis related to gang violence, social unrest, and insecurity, has strained the health system’s response capacity. In addition, the country is highly vulnerable and at risk of natural hazards, which have exacerbated previous humanitarian crises.

The overall risk assessed for this outbreak is very high at the national level, due to the following reasons:

The current socio-economic situation, ongoing humanitarian crisis and poor health conditions are affecting a large proportion of the population leaving them vulnerable to the risk of cholera infection and recurrence of cholera.
 In the affected areas of Port-au-Prince metropolitan area and southern departments, there are 24 200 internally displaced people who have been displaced due to gang violence.
Limited access of the general population to safe drinking water and to sanitation facilities.
Due to the insecurity, the public health system and international partners have limited human resources in Haiti, reducing the capacity to respond.
Logistics issues and lack of access to fuel and insecurity lead to difficulties to import supplies and challenges to access the affected areas. Therefore, timely assessment of the epidemiological situation is complex. Additionally, for the same reasons the shipment of biological samples from healthcare facilities to reference laboratories could also be hampered.
The risk at the regional level is assessed as moderate, due to the following reasons:

Since 2010, confirmed cases of cholera have predominantly been reported from Haiti, followed by the Dominican Republic, Cuba, and Mexico.
Sporadic imported cases have also been reported in other countries in the Region. However, there is greater capacity in other countries to detect and control outbreaks of cholera. Neighboring Dominican Republic which is likely the most at risk of an increase in cases, has the capacity to detect and control cholera.
The risk at the global level was assessed as low.

WHO will continue to evaluate the epidemiological situation in Haiti.

WHO advice
WHO recommends improving access to proper and timely case management of cholera cases, improving access to safe drinking water and sanitation infrastructure, as well as improving infection, prevention, and control in healthcare facilities. These measures along with the promotion of preventive hygiene practices and food safety in affected communities are the most effective means of controlling cholera. Targeted public health communication messages are a key element for a successful campaign.

Oral cholera vaccine (OCV) should be used in conjunction with improvements in water and sanitation to control cholera outbreaks and for prevention in targeted areas known to be at high risk for cholera.

Given the re-emergence of cholera in Haiti, WHO recommends that Member States strengthen and maintain surveillance for cholera for the early detection of suspected cases and to provide adequate treatment and prevent its spread. Early and adequate treatment limits the case fatality ratio (CFR) of hospitalized patients to less than 1%.

WHO does not recommend any travel or trade restrictions on Haiti based on the currently available information. 


Situation at a glance
Dengue is endemic in Nepal. The country is experiencing a surge in cases that started from the week commencing 8 August to 26 August. Between January to 28 September 2022, a total of 28 109 confirmed and suspected dengue cases and 38 confirmed deaths due to dengue have been recorded, affecting all seven provinces. The causative serotype(s) is unknown. This represents the largest dengue outbreak in Nepal with regard to the cumulative number of cases reported nationwide per year.
Description of the situation

Between January and 28 September 2022, a total of 28 109 suspected and confirmed cases of dengue fever including 38 confirmed deaths (overall CFR 0.13%) have been reported from all seven provinces of Nepal, affecting all 77 districts in Nepal (Figure 1). Bagmati province which is the second-most populous province has reported the highest number of cases (78.2%) and deaths (68.4%).

According to the Epidemiology and Disease Control Division (EDCD) of the Ministry of Health and Population, the highest number of new cases in 2022 have been reported in the districts of Kathmandu (n=9528; 33.8%), Lalitpur (n=6548; 23.2%), and Makwanpur (n=2776, 9.8%).

Data on demographics was available for 23% of cases (n= 6734) of which 76% (5175/6734) were aged 15-59 years old, and 54% were males (n=3637). As of 28 September, 38 deaths have been verified, of which males and cases aged 15 – 59 years old each accounted for 55% (n=21) of reported deaths. Cases aged over 60 years old accounted for 39% (n=15) of reported deaths.

Dengue cases have increased since July coinciding with the rainy season with majority of the cases reported during September (83.6%; n=23 514).

Figure 1.  Number of Dengue cases reported from districts of Nepal from 1 January- 28 September 2022. 

Figure 2.   Number of dengue cases reported by months in Nepal from 1 January to 28 September 2022 

Epidemiology
Dengue is a viral infection transmitted to humans through the bite of infected mosquitoes and is found in tropical and sub-tropical climates worldwide, mostly in urban and semi-urban areas. The primary vectors that transmit the disease are Aedes aegypti mosquitoes and, to a lesser extent, Aedes albopictus.

Dengue virus (DENV) has four serotypes (DENV-1, DENV-2, DENV-3, DENV-4) and it is possible to be infected by each. Infection with one serotype provides long-term immunity to the homologous serotype but not to the other serotypes; sequential infections put people at greater risk for severe dengue. Many DENV infections produce only mild illness; over 80% of cases are asymptomatic. DENV can cause an acute flu-like illness.

There is no specific treatment for dengue; however, timely detection of cases, identifying any warning signs of severe dengue infection, and appropriate case management are key elements of care to prevent patient death and can lower fatality rates of severe infection to below 1%.

Public health response
The Epidemiology and Diseases Control Division of the Ministry of Health and Population initiated the following actions to manage and coordinate the response:

Overall response: The Ministry of Health and Population (MoHP) together with WHO and hospitals convened a meeting to review the preparedness and map out strategic interventions for the dengue outbreak in the country. Virtual meetings have been conducted with provinces, districts, and local levels of the MoHP to review the current epidemiology and the responses required. WHO drafted the multisectoral engagement plan to accelerate the Dengue Response and submitted it to the EDCD for review and implementation of action plans.
Vector Control measures: WHO assisted in the development of a standard operating procedure for vector control activities. Technical working group meetings have been convened to facilitate dengue response and to strengthen vector surveillance activities in high-risk/high-case reporting districts in Kathmandu valley (which is in Bagmati province) and Lumbini province). Search and destroy campaigns for mosquitoes in municipalities including Lalitpur and Kathmandu (prioritizing main breeding containers) have been initiated. Vector surveillance and sample collection in high-case reporting districts in Kathmandu have been initiated.
Laboratory: A total of 39 000 diagnostic kits have been provided through WHO and Government funding.  WHO facilitated sample collection for serotyping from ten identified hospitals nation wise in collaboration with EDCD and National Public Health Laboratory (NPHL).
Clinical Management: A total of 200 physicians and medical officers were trained in September, in the case management of dengue fever, referral of dengue patients, and reporting for the dengue surveillance system.  This included in-person attendance of 70 healthcare workers (HCWs) from major hospitals in Kathmandu Valley and an additional 130 HCWs from all Provinces who joined virtually. The video recording of the orientation has been disseminated by EDCD for its wider use.
WHO risk assessment
Nepal reported its first dengue case in a traveller returning from India in 2004. Since then, dengue has been endemic in Nepal. The country has expertise and experience in managing dengue, however, WHO considers the overall risk for the current dengue outbreak high at the national level due to the following reasons:

As dengue is recurrent in the country, the population may be at risk of re-infection and therefore, serious complications may occur if not managed promptly and correctly.  At present, severe dengue cases and case-fatality rates appear to be increasing, likely due to the limited hospital capacity in-country and limited access to and use of health care services. With the current increase in other vector-borne diseases in Nepal this year, such as Japanese Encephalitis and Scrub typhus, affecting the national health system capacity, there is a high risk of serious health impacts from dengue fever.
Dengue virus has the potential to cause epidemics resulting in high morbidity and mortality.  There is no specific treatment. Early recognition of dengue virus infection and appropriate clinical management can reduce the severity of disease and mortality among dengue patients.
The current circulating serotype is unknown at this stage, although further laboratory tests are planned. Infection with one serotype provides long-term immunity to the homologous serotype, however, the risk for severe dengue is high in a second infection with a different DENV serotype.
Current data suggests that dengue cases are increasing in magnitude and expanding out of the lowland areas typically suitable for the breeding of Aedes mosquitoes to higher elevations, potentially due to climate changes and rapid urbanization.
This outbreak underscores the need for improved vector surveillance, enhanced laboratory capacity for better case detection, and improved surveillance of acute febrile illness in Nepal to effectively control the outbreak. 

There is frequent population movement across the Nepal-India land border. Dengue is endemic in many parts of India including northern Indian States, which share the border with Nepal.  Given the high incidence in Nepal, it is possible that dengue may spread across the border into India, although its consequences may depend on a number of factors such as the density of vectors, circulating serotypes, and level of public health response in the neighbouring Indian states. Nepal is a popular tourist destination, hence, spread through international travellers cannot be ruled out as Nepal is easing international travel restrictions imposed in response to COVID-19.

WHO advice
The proximity of mosquito vector breeding sites to human habitation is a significant risk factor for dengue virus infection.  Although dengue does not spread from human to human, mosquitoes can become infected after biting infected individuals. This cycle, therefore, makes the infected mosquito capable of spreading the dengue virus among households and in the neighbourhood, leading to clusters of cases.

The prevention and control of dengue depend on effective vector control. WHO promotes a strategic approach known as Integrated Vector Management (IVM) to control mosquito vectors, including Aedes subspecies (the vector of dengue). IVM should be enhanced to remove potential breeding sites, reduce vector populations, and minimize individual exposure. This should involve vector control strategies for larvae and adults (i.e., environmental management and source reduction, and chemical control measures), as well as strategies for protecting people and households.

Vector control activities should focus on all areas where there is a risk of human-vector contact (place of residence, workplaces, schools and hospitals, and construction sites in Kathmandu Valley). Vector control activities can include covering, draining, and cleaning household water storage containers on a weekly basis. Space spraying with insecticide can be deployed as an emergency measure. Chlorination and application of suitable larvicides/insecticides for water storage in outdoor containers should also be considered.

Personal protective measures during outdoor activities include the application of repellents to exposed skin or clothing, and the wearing of long sleeves shirts and trousers. Indoors, additionally, protection can include the use of household insecticide aerosol products or mosquito coils. Window and door screens, as well as air conditioning, can reduce the probability of mosquitoes entering the house. Insecticide-treated nets offer good protection to people against mosquito bites while sleeping during the day. Since Aedes mosquitoes are active at dawn and dusk, personal protective measures are recommended particularly at these times of the day.

There is no specific treatment for dengue infection, but early detection of warning signs and timely access to appropriate clinical management (including referral to an appropriate health care facility) reduce the risk for severe dengue complications and mortality. Vector and human case surveillance should continue to be enhanced in all affected areas and across the country. Where feasible, resources should be allocated for the strengthening of a sample referral mechanism for the confirmation and sub-typing of dengue virus.

WHO does not recommend that any general travel or trade restrictions be applied to Nepal based on the information available for this event.



Situation at a glance
On 27 September 2022, the Ministry of Health (MoH) of the Democratic Republic of the Congo declared the end of the Ebola virus disease (EVD) outbreak that affected Butanuka health area, Beni health zone, North Kivu province. In accordance with WHO recommendations, the declaration was made 42 days (twice the maximum incubation period for Ebola virus infections) after the burial of the last and only confirmed case.
Description of the situation
On 21 August 2022, the MoH of the Democratic Republic of the Congo declared an Ebola outbreak following laboratory confirmation via reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) of Ebola virus in a fatal case in Beni health zone, North Kivu province.

The case was a 46-year-old woman hospitalized and treated from 23 July to 15 August (23 days) for symptoms that included cough, headache, polyarthralgia (joint pain), and physical asthenia (general fatigue), thought to be related to her known co-morbidities. The patient died in hospital on 15 August 2022. The body was returned to the family and buried in a traditional manner on 16 August prior to receipt of the laboratory results.

Samples of blood and oropharyngeal secretions tested positive for Zaire ebolavirus by RT-PCR at the National Institute for Biomedical Research in Beni (INRB) on 15 August and these were confirmed at Rodolphe Mérieux INRB Laboratory in Goma on 16 August. The outbreak was declared by the MoH following EVD confirmation testing and genetic sequencing.

No additional confirmed or probable cases have been identified since 16 August. Of the 182 contacts of the case, 172 were identified and monitored for 21 days. The 10 contacts who were not followed up were unable to be reached.

Investigations are still ongoing to determine the source of the outbreak.

Public health response
Overall response: The MoH, together with WHO and other partners, conducted response measures to control the outbreak and prevent further spread. National and district emergency management committees were activated to coordinate the response. Multidisciplinary teams were deployed to actively search and provide care for cases; identify, reach and follow-up contacts; and sensitize communities on outbreak prevention and control interventions.

Alerts and testing: During this outbreak, from 21 August to 27 September 2022, a total of 9173 alerts were reported from Beni health zone, and all (100%) were investigated, including 607 (7%) validated as suspected cases of EVD. A total of 682 samples were tested for EVD.

Points of entry: A total of 2390 (92%) of 2608 travelers registered at points of entry were screened for EVD, and no alerts were detected.

Vaccination: As of 27 September, 550 persons in the affected health zone have been vaccinated against EVD using the ring strategy, targeting contacts and contacts of contact. Frontline health care workers made up the majority of those vaccinated (483).

WHO risk assessment
This latest EVD outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is declared over, with no new cases reported for 42 days after the burial of the last and only confirmed case on 16 August 2022. This case is genetically linked to the 2018-2020 outbreak in North Kivu, Ituri and South Kivu provinces. (For more information on this outbreak, please see the WHO outbreak account related to the 2018-2020 event). The source of this most recent outbreak has not yet been identified.

A future outbreak is not unexpected given that EVD is endemic in the country. Ebola virus is enzootic and a resurgence from viral persistence in survivors described in recent epidemics. Re-emergence of EVD is a major public health concern in the Democratic Republic of the Congo; gaps remain in the country's capacity to recover, prepare for, and respond to outbreaks. The concurrent outbreaks in the country (COVID-19, cholera, measles, polio, yellow fever, monkeypox, etc) as well as the protracted humanitarian situation in the Eastern part of the country have put increasing pressure on the health system and the available resources.

A confluence of environmental and socioeconomic factors — including community mistrust, weak health systems, and political instability — in some specific areas such as North Kivu province can increase the risk for new outbreaks of EVD. Moreover, improved capacities in detection, laboratory confirmation and increased surveillance may explain the increased frequency in detecting EVD outbreaks. Nevertheless, WHO is concerned that ongoing challenges regarding insecurity as well as health system challenges (epidemiological surveillance, IPC programmes and practices in health care settings), coupled with the emergence of COVID-19 and other ongoing outbreaks, may jeopardize the country's ability to rapidly detect and respond to any re-emergence.

WHO advice
WHO advises the following risk reduction measures as an effective way to reduce EVD transmission in humans:

Reduce the risk of wildlife-to-human transmission from contact with infected fruit bats or non-human primates and the consumption of their raw meat. Animals should be handled with gloves and other appropriate protective clothing.
Reduce the risk of human-to-human transmission from direct or close contact with people with Ebola symptoms, particularly with their bodily fluids. Appropriate personal protective equipment should be worn when taking care of ill patients. Regular hand washing is required after visiting patients in hospital, as well as after touching or coming into contact with any body fluids.
Continue training and retraining of health personnel for early detection, isolation and treatment of EVD cases as well as retraining on safe and dignified burials.
Reduce the risk of possible transmission from virus persistence in some body fluids of survivors. WHO recommends providing medical care, psychological support and biological testing (until two consecutive negative tests) through an EVD survivors care programme. WHO does not recommend isolation of male or female convalescent patients whose blood has been tested negative for the Ebola virus.
Reduce amplification of transmission through health care by strengthening IPC programmes within the health care system.
Provide ongoing training of the health workforce for early detection, isolation, and treatment of EVD cases as well as re-training on safe and dignified burials and the IPC ring approach.
Engage with communities to reinforce safe and dignified burial practices.
Build and maintain capacities for logistic support in at-risk areas or countries.
Based on the current risk assessment and prior evidence on Ebola outbreaks, WHO advises against any restriction of travel and trade to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.





Situation at a glance
On 16 September 2022, the Ministry of Health (MoH) of Ghana declared the end of the Marburg Virus Disease (MVD) outbreak that affected the country’s Ashanti, Savannah and Western regions. In accordance with WHO recommendations the declaration was made 42 days (twice the maximum incubation period for Marburg infection) after the second negative test of the last confirmed case on 5 August 2022.
Description of the situation
Between 28 June and 16 September 2022, the Ministry of Health of Ghana reported three confirmed cases of Marburg Virus Disease (MVD) including two deaths (CFR 67%). All three cases were from the same household.

The Ministry of Health of Ghana declared the outbreak on 7 July 2022, after confirmation of Marburg virus on 1 July 2022 in a 26-year-old male (the index case) by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) at Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research (NMIMR). Blood samples were sent to Institute Pasteur, Dakar for confirmation. The onset of his symptoms was the 22 June with subsequent bleeding from the nose and mouth. The patient was admitted to a hospital on 26 June 2022 and died the following day.

The second patient, a 14-month-old child, developed symptoms and was admitted on 17 July; he died on the third day of admission. The third patient, a 24-year-old female was admitted to a government-designated isolation center on 26 July 2022.   

A total of 198 contacts were identified, monitored, and completed their recommended initial 21-day observation period which was then extended for another 21 days by the health authorities.

On 16 September 2022, the MoH declared the end of the outbreak, 42 days (twice the maximum incubation period) after the second negative test of the last confirmed case on 5 August 2022.

Epidemiology
Marburg Virus Disease (MVD) is an epidemic-prone disease associated with high case fatality ratios (CFR; 24-88%). In the early course of the disease, the clinical diagnosis of MVD is difficult to distinguish from many other tropical febrile illnesses due to the similarities in the clinical symptoms. Other VHFs need to be excluded, including Ebola virus disease, as well as malaria, typhoid fever, leptospirosis, rickettsial infections, and plague. Human MVD infection can result from prolonged exposure to mines or caves inhabited by Rousettus bat colonies. Marburg virus spreads through human-to-human transmission via direct contact (through broken skin or mucous membranes) with infected people's blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids, and surfaces and materials (e.g. bedding, clothing) contaminated with these fluids.
Although no vaccines or antiviral treatments are approved to treat the virus, supportive care – rehydration with oral or intravenous fluids – and treatment of specific symptoms improve survival. A range of potential treatments are being evaluated, including blood products, immune therapies, and drug therapies.

In 2021, an outbreak of MVD was reported for the first time in West Africa in Guinea. Genetic sequencing results indicated that the Marburg virus (MARV) genomes from Ghana are related to the sequence from the 2021 outbreak and overall, group with sequences obtained from bats in Sierra Leone and an outbreak that occurred in Angola in 2004-2005.

Public health response
Overall Response: The MoH established a national coordination mechanism and response activities were initiated by WHO and other key partners, US Center for Disease Control, UNICEF and United Kingdom, Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office (FCDO). Technical experts were deployed by WHO to support the country in strengthening Infection Prevention and Control (IPC), coordination, surveillance, and to conduct investigations and risk assessment.
Surveillance and Contract Tracing: An integrated disease surveillance and response (IDSR) system was in place and reported alerts were tested. Surveillance activities were implemented including epidemiological investigation and 198 contacts were followed up.
Infection Prevention and Control: Health care workers were sensitized on case definition and infection prevention.
Laboratory: Samples of all suspected cases were tested at the laboratory of NMIMR. Genomic sequencing was performed on samples from two of the confirmed cases at NMIMR and IPD.
Community Engagement: Orientation was held for community-based surveillance volunteers to enhance surveillance in the community.
WHO risk assessment
The current outbreak of MVD in Ghana has been declared over, with no new cases reported for 42-days after the second negative test of the last confirmed case on 5 August 2022. This was the first MVD outbreak reported in Ghana. Outbreaks of MVD are not frequent in West Africa. The most recent MVD outbreak was reported in the Republic of Guinea (one confirmed case) in August 2021. Countries in the African Region that have previously reported outbreaks of MVD include Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya, South Africa, and Uganda.  

The epidemiological investigation has not yet identified the source of this outbreak, which highlights the need to intensify community-based surveillance. The risk of this outbreak at its onset was assessed high at the national level, moderate at the regional level, and low at the global level.

WHO advice
Human-to-human transmission of Marburg virus is primarily associated with direct contact with blood and/or bodily fluids of infected persons, and health care related transmission of Marburg virus has been reported when appropriate infection control measures have not been implemented.

Infection Prevention and Control at Health Care Facilities: Health care workers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed Marburg virus disease should apply standard and transmission-based IPC precautions to avoid any exposure to blood and/or bodily fluids, as well as unprotected contact with the possibly contaminated environment. IPC precautions include:

Early recognition (screening, triage) and isolation of suspected cases.
Appropriate isolation capacity (including infrastructure and human resources).
Health care workers’ access to hand hygiene resources (i.e., soap and water or alcohol-based hand rub).
Appropriate and accessible PPE for health care workers.
Safe injection practices (emphasize on single-use only needles).
Procedures and resources for decontamination and sterilization of medical devices.
Appropriate management of infectious waste.
Integrated disease surveillance and response activities, including community-based surveillance, must continue to be strengthened within all affected health zones.

Community Awareness for Infection prevention and control: Raising awareness of the risk factors for Marburg virus disease and the protective measures individuals can take to reduce human exposure to the virus are the key measures to reduce human infections and deaths. Key public health communication messages include:

Reducing the risk of human-to-human transmission in the community arising from direct contact with infected patients, particularly with their bodily fluids.
Avoiding close physical contact with patients who have Marburg virus disease.
Any suspected case should not be managed at home, but immediately transferred to a health facility for treatment and isolation. During this transfer, health care workers should wear appropriate PPE.
Regular hand washing should be performed after visiting sick relatives in hospital.
Communities affected by Marburg should make efforts to ensure that the population is well informed, both about the nature of the disease itself to avoid further transmission, community stigmatization, and encourage early presentation to treatment centers and other necessary outbreak containment measures, including safe burial of the dead. People who have died from Marburg should be promptly and safely buried.
Reduce the risk of wildlife-to-human transmissions, such as through contact with fruit bats, monkeys, and apes:

Handle wildlife with gloves and other appropriate protective clothing.
Cook animal products such as blood and meat thoroughly before consumption and avoid consumption of raw meat.
During work, research activities or tourist visits in mines or caves inhabited by fruit bat colonies, people should wear gloves and other appropriate protective clothing including masks.




Situation at a glance
On 20 September 2022, Uganda health authorities declared an outbreak of Ebola disease, caused by Sudan virus, following laboratory confirmation of a patient from a village in Madudu sub-county, Mubende district, central Uganda. As of 25 September 2022, a cumulative number of 18 confirmed and 18 probable cases have been reported from Mubende, Kyegegwa and Kassanda districts, including 23 deaths, of which five were among confirmed cases (CFR among confirmed cases 28%). This is the first Ebola disease outbreak caused by Sudan virus (SUDV) in Uganda since 2012.
Description of the situation

On 20 September 2022, the health authorities in Uganda declared an outbreak of Ebola disease caused by Sudan virus (SUDV), after a case was confirmed in a village of Madudu sub-county in Mubende district, central Uganda.

The case was a 24-year-old male who developed a wide range of symptoms on 11 September including high-grade fever, tonic convulsions, blood-stained vomit and diarrhoea, loss of appetite, pain while swallowing, chest pain, dry cough and bleeding in the eyes. He visited two private clinics, successively between 11-13 and 13-15 September without improvement. He was then referred to the Regional Referral Hospital (RRH) on 15 September where he was isolated as a suspected case of viral haemorrhagic fever. A blood sample was collected on 17 September and sent to the Uganda Virus Research Institute (UVRI) in Kampala where RT- PCR tests conducted were positive for SUDV on 19 September. On the same day, the patient died.

Results of preliminary investigations identified a number of community deaths from an unknown illness in Madudu and Kiruma sub-counties of Mubende district reported in the first two weeks of September. These deaths are now considered to be probable cases of Ebola caused by SUDV.

As of 25 September 2022, a cumulative number of 36 cases (18 confirmed and 18 probable cases) have been reported from Mubende (14 confirmed and 18 probable), Kyegegwa (three confirmed cases) and Kassanda (one confirmed case) districts. Twenty-three deaths have been recorded, of which five were among confirmed cases (CFR among confirmed cases 28%). Of the total confirmed and suspected cases, 62% are female and 38% are male. There are currently 13 confirmed cases hospitalized. The median age of the cases is 26 years (range 1 year to 60 years). A cumulative number of 223 contacts have been listed.

Map of confirmed (n=18) and suspected (n=18) cases of Ebola disease caused by Sudan virus, by district, Uganda (as of 25 September 2022).



Epidemiology
According to the International Classification of Disease for filoviruses (ICD-11) released in May 2019, Ebola disease is now sub-categorized depending on the causative virus. Outbreaks of Ebola disease caused by Sudan virus are named Sudan Virus Disease (SVD) outbreaks. Prior to May 2019 all viruses causing Ebola disease were grouped together. Based on the results of laboratory tests, this outbreak is caused by Sudan virus.

Sudan virus disease is a severe, often fatal illness affecting humans. Sudan virus was first reported in southern Sudan in June 1976, since then the virus has emerged periodically and up to now, seven outbreaks caused by SUDV have been reported, four in Uganda and three in Sudan. The estimated case fatality ratios of SVD have varied from 41% to 100% in past outbreaks.

The virus is introduced into the human population through close contact with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected animals such as fruit bats, chimpanzees, gorillas, monkeys, forest antelope or porcupines found ill or dead or in the rainforest. The virus then spreads through human-to-human transmission via direct contact (through broken skin or mucous membranes) with either blood or body fluids of a person who is sick with or has died from SVD or objects that have been contaminated with body fluids (like blood, faeces, vomit) from a person sick with SVD or the body of a person who died from SVD.

The incubation period ranges from 2 to 21 days. People infected with Sudan virus cannot spread the disease until they develop symptoms, and they remain infectious as long as their blood contains the virus. Symptoms of SVD can be sudden and include fever, fatigue, muscle pain, headache, and sore throat later followed by vomiting, diarrhoea, rash, symptoms of impaired kidney and liver function. In some cases, the patient might present both internal and external bleeding (for example, bleeding from the gums, or blood in the stools).

The diagnosis of SVD can be difficult, as early nonspecific manifestation of the disease may mimic other infectious diseases such as malaria, typhoid fever and meningitis. Confirmation is made using numerous diagnostic methods including RT-PCR. Supportive care - rehydration with oral or intravenous fluids - and treatment of specific symptoms improve survival.

There are no licensed vaccines or therapeutics for the prevention and treatment of Sudan virus disease.

Uganda has reported four SVD outbreaks, in 2000, 2011 and 2012 (two outbreaks). Uganda also reported a Bundibugyo virus disease outbreak in 2007 and an Ebola virus disease outbreak in 2019.

Public health response
Coordination

The Ministry of Health (MOH) established a National Task Force, with WHO providing technical support
The Incidence Management Team was activated both within the MOH and the WHO country office
The MOH Incident Commander has been deployed to Mubende District to support response efforts in the affected region
WHO is supporting the orientation of the leadership at the Regional Referral Hospital and the district health team on early identification and case management
A response plan is being developed and priority actions have been identified
Surveillance and Laboratory

WHO has supported the activation of surveillance structures in districts
Contact tracing and active case finding are ongoing
WHO has deployed a technical team in Mubende district to support surveillance
Case Management

WHO has supported the assessment of the isolation unit at the regional referral Hospital and dispatched an Ebola disease kit and tent for the isolation of patients
WHO has deployed a central team of experts to support the establishment of a treatment unit in the Regional Referral Hospital
Infection prevention and control (IPC) teams were deployed to support capacity building of health workers in IPC and the establishment of screening and triage at all health facilities in affected districts
Communication and Risk Communication

As part of the communication and risk communication activities, WHO provided technical support for the organization of the press conference on Ebola and the development and dissemination of a press statement by the Ministry of Health
Currently, WHO is supporting the review of Information, Education and Communication (IEC) material for dissemination to the public
WHO risk assessment
Uganda has experience in responding to Ebola virus disease and Sudan virus disease outbreaks, and necessary action has been initiated quickly. The current outbreak is the first Ebola disease outbreak caused by Sudan virus in Uganda since 2012. 

In the absence of licensed vaccines and therapeutics for prevention and treatment of Sudan virus disease, the risk of potential serious public health impact is high. Community deaths and care of patients in private facilities and hospitals and other community health services with limited protection and infection prevention and control measures entail a high risk of many transmission chains. Investigations are ongoing to determine the scope of the outbreak and the possibility of spreading to other districts. Importation of cases to neighbouring countries cannot be ruled out at this stage.

According to the information currently available, the overall risk has been assessed as high at national level considering: (i) the confirmed Sudan virus and the lack of an authorized vaccine (ii) the possibility that the event started three weeks before the identification of the index case and several transmission chains  have not been  not tracked; (iii) patients presented at various facilities with suboptimal infection, prevention and control (IPC) practices including inadequate use of personal protective equipment (PPE); the patients died and were traditionally buried with large gathering ceremonies; (iv) although the country has developed an increased capacity to respond to Ebola outbreaks over recent years, and has a local capacity that can be easily mobilized and organised with  available resources to mount a robust response, the system could be overwhelmed if  the number of cases increases and the outbreak spreads to other sub-counties, districts and regions, as the country simultaneously responds to multiple  emergencies, including anthrax, COVID-19, Rift Valley fever and Yellow fever, as well as flooding and prevailing food insecurity.

In addition, the outbreak was detected among individuals living around an active local gold mine. Mobility among traders of this commodity is likely to be high, and the declaration of the outbreak may cause some miners already incubating the disease to flee.

The currently affected Mubende district has no international borders. Nevertheless, the risk of international spread cannot be ruled out due to the active cross-border population movement. In addition, investigations are ongoing to establish transmission chains and the scope of the outbreak is yet to be determined.

At Regional and Global levels, the overall risk has been assessed as low.

WHO advice
Effective outbreak control relies on applying a package of interventions, including case management, surveillance and contact tracing, an optimal laboratory service, implementation of infection prevention and control measures in health care and community settings, safe and dignified burials and community engagement and social mobilization. Community engagement is essential to successfully controlling outbreaks. Raising awareness of risk factors for Ebola infection and protective measures that individuals can take is an effective way to reduce human transmission.

Early initiation of supportive treatment has been shown to significantly reduce deaths from Ebola disease. There is a need to strengthen surveillance and other response activities to contain the possibility of exponential spread.

Based on available evidence the ERVEBO vaccine — used in the recent responses against the Ebola virus disease outbreaks — will not provide cross-protection against the Sudan virus disease.

The Johnson & Johnson (Janssen) vaccine called Zabdeno/Mvabea against Ebola has only been approved by the European Medicines Agency (EMA) against Ebola virus disease and has not been tested against Sudan virus disease. This vaccine is administered on a two-dose schedule and requires 56 days between the two doses. The first dose provides protection against the Zaire ebolavirus and the second dose was designed to provide protection against other species of the virus, including Sudan. However, this multiantigen protection has not been demonstrated with clinical data.  Even if the vaccine was tested and proved to be effective against Sudan ebolavirus, it would only provide protection some days after the second dose is administered. This means the vaccine is not appropriate for outbreak response.

WHO advises against any restrictions on travel and/or trade to Uganda based on available information for the current outbreak.





Description of the situation
In the past few months, there have been several genetically linked Sabin-like type 2 poliovirus (SL2) detections from environmental samples in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (hereafter the United Kingdom) and the United States of America.  

In the United Kingdom, since February 2022, the WHO Global Polio Laboratory Network (GPLN) located at the National Institute for Biological Standards and Control (NIBSC) in London has consistently detected Sabin-like type 2 poliovirus isolates in sewage samples collected from London. Samples collected on 24 and 31 May had sufficient mutations to qualify as vaccine derived polio virus type 2 (VDPV2). Subsequently, due to a new detection of the virus more than two months later, these samples were classified as ‘circulating’ VDPV2 on 8 August.  As of 5 September, no human case associated with VDPV2 has been reported in the United Kingdom.  

In the United States of America, Sabin-like type 2 poliovirus has been consistently detected in environmental samples collected between 21 April to 26 August 2022 from Rockland County, New York State, and nearby counties. In late July, a case of VDPV2 was reported in an unvaccinated individual in Rockland County, who presented with paralysis. The case had no recent history of international travel. This is the first case of poliomyelitis reported in the country since 2013. Due to detection of environmental viral sequences (collected on 3 August and 11 August) containing more than five nucleotide changes, and both linked to the case reported in Rockland County – these viruses are now being classified as ‘circulating’ VDPV2.   

The virus detected in environmental samples in New York State, United States of America is genetically linked to viruses detected in sewage samples from London, United Kingdom and in sewage samples collected between January to June 2022 from Jerusalem District, Israel1.   

Figure-1 Detection of genetically linked cVDPV2 isolates in the United Kingdom and the United States of America from February to August 2022 




Epidemiology
Polio is a highly infectious disease that largely affects children under five years of age, causing permanent paralysis (approximately 1 in 200 infections) or death (5-10% of those paralyzed).  

The virus is transmitted from person-to-person, mainly through the fecal-oral route or, less frequently, by a common vehicle (e.g., contaminated water or food) and multiplies in the intestine, from where it can invade the nervous system and cause paralysis and death. Initial symptoms of polio include fever, fatigue, headache, vomiting, stiffness of the neck and pain in the limbs. In a small proportion of cases, the disease causes paralysis, which is often permanent. There is no cure for polio but it can be prevented by immunization. 

The incubation period is usually 7–10 days but can range from 4–35 days. Up to 90% of those infected are either asymptomatic or experience only mild symptoms and the disease often goes unrecognized. 

Vaccine-derived poliovirus is a well-documented type of poliovirus that has mutated from the strain originally contained in the oral polio vaccine (OPV). The OPV contains a live, weakened form of poliovirus. On rare occasions, when replicating in the gastrointestinal tract, OPV strains genetically change and may spread in communities that are not fully vaccinated against polio, especially in areas where there is poor hygiene, poor sanitation, or overcrowding. Further changes occur as these viruses spread from person to person. The lower the population immunity, the longer this virus survives and the more genetic changes it undergoes. In very rare instances, the vaccine-derived virus can genetically change into a form that can paralyze – this is what is known as a vaccine-derived poliovirus (VDPV). 

The detection of VDPV in at least two different sources and at least two months apart, that are genetically linked, showing evidence of transmission in the community, should be classified as ‘circulating’ vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2).  cVDPV2 continues to affect different areas of the world. 

Public health response
WHO, in coordination with national authorities, will continue to evaluate the genetic and epidemiological situation to determine the possible spread of the virus and the potential risk associated with these isolates detected from different locations around the world.  

Public health measures in the United Kingdom
The United Kingdom Health Security Agency (UKHSA) is conducting further investigations including assessing the public health risk and implementing response measures. These measures include: 

Strengthening the environmental, clinical and laboratory surveillance for polio.  
A catch-up campaign targeted at children aged less than 5 years of age in London was implemented in June 2022, and a supplementary booster inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) campaign targeting children aged 1 to 9 years in London was launched in August 2022. 
Public health professionals, health professionals, and laboratory staff alerted to the detection of VDPV2 in London. 
Health professionals reminded of the importance of checking newly registered children and adult routine immunizations are up-to-date, with an emphasis on under-immunized populations (new migrants, asylum seekers and refugees). 
Local and regional laboratories requested to refer all enterovirus positive stool samples to the UKHSA. 
Enhancing environmental sampling to assess the extent of the spread of the virus across London. In addition, a range of additional sewage sampling sites are being stood up across the country.
Public health measures in the United States of America 
Enhancing polio wastewater surveillance. 
Ongoing activities to support polio vaccination and increase vaccination coverage in Rockland and Orange Counties in New York State. Planning underway to launch an immunization campaign to provide IPV to residents of Rockland County who have potentially been exposed to poliovirus. 
Conducting testing for poliovirus in wastewater samples in New York and neighbouring States, as well as providing confirmatory testing for clinical specimens. 
Coordinating surveillance for Acute Flaccid Myelitis (AFM) throughout the United States of America and enhancing surveillance for paralytic and non-paralytic polio in areas where poliovirus has been detected in wastewater. 
Health advisories including information on polio, the situation in New York State, and polio immunization, have been released to health providers and hospitals across the State and in the immediate county of residence of the case. 
On 9 September, a state disaster emergency due to polio was declared in New York State. The declaration allows additional health professionals, such as pharmacists, to administer polio vaccine and allows health practitioners to issue standing orders for polio vaccinations.
WHO risk assessment
The emergence of cVDPV2 in the United Kingdom and in the United States of America is a reminder that until polio is eradicated, polio-free countries will remain at risk of polio re-infection or re-emergence. The detection of this VDPV2 strain underscores the importance of;  

• maintaining high levels of routine polio vaccination coverage at all levels and in all communities to minimize the risk and consequences of any poliovirus circulation. 
• having sensitive surveillance systems for the timely detection of VDPV importation or VDPV emergence. 
Based on the WHO UNICEF estimates, the vaccine coverage for three routine doses of polio vaccine evaluated in children aged 12 months in the United Kingdom and United States of America were 93% and 92% respectively in 2021.

WHO will continue to support the ongoing investigation, risk assessment and outbreak response by national authorities.  

WHO advice
WHO reiterates to all Member States the importance of reaching and maintaining polio vaccination coverage of more than 95% in each district or municipality; maintaining high quality for three main surveillance indicators: acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) rate, percentage of cases investigated within 48 hours, and percentage of cases with an adequate sample; optimizing supplementary (environmental and enterovirus) poliovirus surveillance and updating national poliovirus outbreak response plans in order to rapidly detect and respond to new virus importations or VDPV emergence to minimize the consequences of poliovirus transmission and facilitate a rapid response.

The thirty-second polio IHR Emergency Committee meeting held in June 2022, convened under the International Health Regulations (2005), agreed that the risk of international spread of poliovirus remains a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC) and recommended the extension of Temporary Recommendations for a further three months. 



Situation at a glance
On 8 July 2022, WHO was notified of a case of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) with acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) from Tamanrasset province, southern Algeria. This represents the first cVDPV2 case identified in the country. Local public health authorities are conducting a field investigation, and an active search for additional AFP cases; a reactive Immunization campaign is also planned.
Description of the situation
On 8 July 2022, a case of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) in Algeria was notified to WHO through the Global Polio Laboratory Network (GPLN). The case is a child under two years old from Tamanrasset province, southern Algeria, with onset of acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) on 11 April 2022. Stool specimens tested positive for cVDPV2 by the Pasteur Institute of Algeria and were confirmed by Pasteur Institute of Paris. Genomic sequencing analysis indicates that the isolated virus is genetically linked to a virus previously isolated in Kano, Nigeria. The child had not received any polio vaccine doses and has no history of travel outside Tamanrasset province.

This represents the first cVDPV2 case identified in Algeria, where, according to the 2021 WHO-UNICEF immunization coverage estimates, Pol3 (3rd dose of polio-containing vaccine) coverage was 91% and IPV1 (one dose of the inactivated polio vaccine) coverage was 94%.

Epidemiology
Polio is a highly infectious disease that largely affects children under five years of age, causing permanent paralysis (approximately 1 in 200 infections) or death (2-10% of those paralyzed).

The virus is transmitted by person-to-person, mainly through the fecal-oral route or, less frequently, by a common vehicle (e.g., contaminated water or food) and multiplies in the intestine, from where it can invade the nervous system and cause paralysis.

The incubation period is usually 7–10 days but can range from 4–35 days. Up to 90% of those infected are either asymptomatic or experience mild symptoms and the disease usually goes unrecognized.

Vaccine-derived poliovirus is a well-documented strain of poliovirus mutated from the strain originally contained in oral polio vaccine (OPV). OPV contains a live, weakened form of poliovirus that replicates in the intestine for a limited period, thereby developing immunity by building up antibodies. On rare occasions, when replicating in the gastrointestinal tract, OPV strains genetically change and may spread in communities that are not fully vaccinated against polio, especially in areas where there is poor hygiene, poor sanitation, or overcrowding. The lower the population immunity, the longer this virus survives and the more genetic changes it undergoes.

In very rare instances, the vaccine-derived virus can genetically change into a form that can cause paralysis as does the wild poliovirus – this is what is known as a vaccine-derived poliovirus (VDPV). The detection of VDPV in at least two different sources and at least two months apart, that are genetically linked, showing evidence of transmission in the community, should be classified as ‘circulating’ vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2). Circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) continues to affect different areas of the world, notably in the African Region.

Public health response
Surveillance has been strengthened for active search for additional AFP cases in and around the immediate area of the detected case.
A Detailed field investigation has been initiated in coordination with the GPLN to identify the extent of the virus circulation (including potentially in neighboring countries).
A response plan has been prepared in accordance with the revised international polio outbreak response SOPs.
A reactive Immunization campaign is planned.
WHO risk assessment
WHO considers there to be a continued high risk of international spread of cVDPV2, due to persisting suboptimal immunity, surveillance gaps, and large-scale population movements. The risk is magnified by decreased immunization rates related to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. 

The current isolate in Algeria is linked to a virus originating in Kano, Nigeria, demonstrating the potential for the international spread of this disease.

WHO advice
It is important that all countries, in particular those with frequent travel and contacts with polio-affected countries and areas, strengthen surveillance for AFP cases and commence planned expansion of environmental surveillance in order to rapidly detect any new virus importation and to facilitate a rapid response. Countries, territories and areas should also maintain uniformly high routine immunization coverage at the district level to minimize the consequences of any new virus introduction.

WHO’s International travel and health recommends that all travellers to polio-affected areas be fully vaccinated against polio. Residents (and visitors for more than 4 weeks) from infected areas should receive an additional dose of oral polio vaccine (OPV) or inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) within four weeks to 12 months of travel.

Based on the advice of an Emergency Committee convened under the International Health Regulations (2005), the risk of international spread of poliovirus remains a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC). Countries affected by poliovirus transmission are subject to Temporary Recommendations. To comply with the Temporary Recommendations issued under the PHEIC, any country infected by poliovirus should declare the outbreak as a national public health emergency, ensure the vaccination of residents and long-term visitors and restrict at the point of departure travel of individuals, who have not been vaccinated or cannot prove the vaccination status.

WHO does not recommend any travel and/or trade restrictions to Algeria based on the information available for this current event.





Situation at a glance
As of 3 September 2022, a cluster of 11 cases of severe pneumonia, including four deaths, have been reported in San Miguel de Tucumán city, Tucuman Province, Argentina. Legionella spp. was isolated in the samples from four cases. Legionellosis is a pneumonia-like illness that varies in severity from mild febrile illness to a serious and sometimes fatal form of pneumonia. Cases were initially reported as being pneumonia of unknown cause. Legionella bacteria was identified as the causative organism on 3 September. All cases presented with bilateral pneumonia, fever, myalgia, abdominal pain, and dyspnea between 18 and 25 August 2022 and are epidemiologically linked to one health facility. Of the 11 cases, eight are health workers of the facility; three are patients of the health facility. Three of the four deaths were among health workers. Health authorities are coordinating cluster investigation activities, active case finding to identify additional cases, contact tracing and public health activities to limit further spread.
Description of the situation
On 29 August 2022, WHO was notified by the Ministry of Health of Argentina of a report from the Ministry of Public Health of Tucumán Province, of a cluster of six cases of bilateral pneumonia without an etiological cause identified in San Miguel de Tucumán city, Tucuman Province, Argentina 1.  All six cases were linked to one private health facility in the city of San Miguel de Tucumán, with the onset of symptoms between 18 and 22 August 2022. The six cases included five health workers and one patient who was admitted to the clinic for an unrelated condition and then subsequently to the intensive care unit after developing pneumonia. In addition to bilateral pneumonia, all cases presented with fever, myalgia, abdominal pain, and dyspnea.

On 1 September, three additional cases were identified through active case finding - all health workers from the same private health facility, aged 30 to 44 years - with similar signs and symptoms to the initial six cases identified 2. The onset of symptoms for these cases was between 20 and 25 August 2022.

Between 2 and 3 September, two additional cases were identified, an 81-year-old male and a 64-year-old male, both with comorbidities, who were hospitalized and presented similar clinical presentation as the previous cases 3.

As of 3 September 2022, 11 cases have been identified, four of whom have died (three health workers). Eight of the 11 reported cases are health workers of the same health facility. The median age of the cases is 45 years; seven are male. Ten cases had underlying conditions and/or risk factors for severe disease, including the four reported deaths. Four cases are still hospitalized as of 3 September. Contacts of the cases are under follow-up and, to date, none have developed symptoms.

Laboratory results

Blood, respiratory and tissues samples were obtained from the 11 cases. Preliminary tests conducted at the local Public Health Laboratory were negative for respiratory viruses, and other viral, bacterial, and fungal agents. On 31 August, samples from the initial six cases were sent to the National Reference Laboratory - the Administration of National Laboratories and Health Institutes (Administración Nacional de Laboratorios e Institutos de Salud - ANLIS per its acronym in Spanish) - for additional testing 4 . As of 3 September 2022, negative results have been obtained for COVID-19 (RT-PCR), Influenza, detection of antibodies for Coxiella, urinary antigen for Legionella spp., panel of 12 respiratory viruses, hantavirus (Elisa IgM), histoplasma (RT-PCR), Yersinia pestis (PCR) and micro agglutination for leptospirosis.

Further analyses of two bronchoalveolar lavage samples by highly sensitive total DNA sequencing (metagenomics) found readings compatible with Legionella spp. On 3 September 2022, ANLIS reported that amplification products of the 16S ribosomal gene for Legionella spp. from the two samples of bronchoalveolar lavage sequenced by metagenomics and analyzed by four different bioinformatic methods, produced results compatible with Legionella pneumophila. Confirmation of these results is expected upon completion of the sequencing processes. This laboratory result supports evidence compatible with Legionnaires’ disease. Blood culture and seroconversion tests continue to be conducted to complement the diagnosis of Legionella infection.  

Epidemiology
Legionellosis is a generic term describing the pneumonic and non-pneumonic forms of infection with the Legionella species of bacteria. Legionellosis varies in severity from mild to serious and can sometimes be fatal.

Legionnaires’ disease, the pneumonic form, has an incubation period of 2 to 10 days (but up to 16 days have been recorded in some outbreaks). It is an important cause of community- and hospital-acquired pneumonia; and although uncommon, Legionnaires may cause outbreaks of public health significance. Initially, symptoms are fever, mild cough, loss of appetite, headache, malaise and lethargy, with some patients also experiencing muscle pain, diarrhoea and confusion. The severity of Legionnaires’ disease ranges from a mild cough to rapidly fatal pneumonia. Untreated Legionnaires’ disease usually worsens during the first week.

Mortality from Legionnaires’ disease depends on the severity of the disease, the use of antibiotic treatment, the setting where Legionella was acquired, and whether the patient has underlying conditions, including immunosuppression. The death rate may be as high as 40–80% in untreated immunosuppressed patients and can be reduced to 5–30% through appropriate case management, depending on the severity of the clinical signs and symptoms. Overall, the death rate is usually between 5–10%.

Public health response
In response to the detection of the cluster of bilateral pneumonia, health authorities in Tucuman Province coordinated cluster investigation activities including the follow-up of cases, search for the source(s) of infection, active case finding to identify additional cases, and contact tracing. Preliminary investigations indicated no secondary cases were identified.

As Legionella spp. has been identified as the etiology of this outbreak, the following public health measures were implemented:

Risk assessment and suspension of healthcare activities in the health facility.
Enhanced surveillance including active and passive case finding.
Biological and environmental sampling, and laboratory testing, including bacteria isolation, and metagenomics.
Case isolation and clinical care of patients.
Contact identification, support and monitoring.
Risk communication
With the support of national health authorities, environmental samples are being collected to define the source of contamination and urgently implement prevention and control measures. The health authorities are also implementing internal and external communication strategies for health professionals and the community.

The Pan American Health Organization (PAHO)/WHO is providing technical support for the outbreak investigation, including advice on sampling, environmental assessment, clinical management, and Infection and Prevention Control (IPC) measures. 

WHO risk assessment
Legionellosis varies in severity from a mild febrile illness to a serious and sometimes fatal form of pneumonia and is caused by exposure to Legionella species found in contaminated water and potting mixes. The most common form of transmission of Legionellosis is inhalation of contaminated aerosols from contaminated water sources. Sources that have been linked to both the transmission of Legionella via aerosols and outbreaks of Legionellosis include air conditioning cooling towers or evaporative condensers associated with air conditioning and industrial cooling, hot and cold water systems, humidifiers, and whirlpool spas. Infection can also occur by aspiration of contaminated water or ice, particularly in susceptible hospital patients. To date, there is no reported direct human-to-human transmission.

Sporadic outbreaks of legionellosis pneumonia have been reported in Argentina before. There are robust surveillance activities being implemented in the affected health facility. Nonetheless, in the absence of an identified source of Legionella bacteria, the risk of developing Legionellosis for people working or hospitalized at the same health facility is currently moderate.

Countries with cases of Legionellosis reported after travel to Argentina should notify their regional IHR focal point.

WHO advice
WHO recommends the continuation of laboratory analyses, case identification and clinical care, contact tracing, outbreak investigation to identify the source(s), implementation of measures to prevent further infections and enhancement of Infection Prevention and Control (IPC) measures. IPC measures in health facilities have been enhanced during the COVID-19 pandemic and should be reinforced to prevent healthcare-associated transmission.  Precautions that are recommended for COVID-19 should continue to be followed.

WHO does not recommend any specific different measures for travelers. In case of symptoms suggestive of respiratory illness either during or after travel, travelers are encouraged to seek medical attention and share their travel history with their healthcare provider.

WHO advises against the application of any travel or trade restrictions on Argentina based on the current information available on this event.






Situation at a glance
Yellow fever is endemic in the WHO African Region and was among the top five most frequently reported events in the region in 2019 and 2020. Twenty-seven countries in Africa have been classified as high-risk by the Eliminate Yellow fever Epidemics (EYE) global strategy. From 1 January 2021 to 26 August 2022, a total of 12 countries in the region have reported 184 confirmed cases and 274 probable cases, including 21 deaths, reflecting ongoing complex viral transmission. Risk factors for onward spread and amplification include low population immunity, population movements, viral transmission dynamics, and climate and ecological factors that have contributed to the spread of Aedes mosquitoes. Response measures, most notably reactive and preventive vaccination campaigns, are ongoing in the affected countries. Since the beginning of 2021, over 3.9 million people have been vaccinated through reactive vaccination campaigns in Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Ghana, and Kenya.
Description of the situation
In 2021, nine African countries - Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Côte d'Ivoire, Democratic Republic of Congo, Gabon, Ghana, Nigeria, and Republic of the Congo - reported a total of 151 confirmed cases of yellow fever (for more details, please see the Disease Outbreak News published on 23 December 20211). Of these nine countries, six continue to report confirmed cases of yellow fever with ongoing transmission in 2022, while Côte d'Ivoire and Nigeria have reported probable cases2 and Gabon has not reported further cases since 2021.  

In 2022, two additional countries, Kenya3 and Uganda4, have reported confirmed cases of yellow fever. From 1 January to 26 August 2022, a total of 33 confirmed cases of yellow fever were reported from eight African countries including Central African Republic (33%, 11 cases), Cameroon (24%, eight cases), Democratic Republic of Congo (13%, four cases), Kenya (9%, three cases), Chad (6%, two cases), Republic of the Congo (6%, two cases), Uganda (6%, two cases), and Ghana (3%, one case).  

Ten countries - Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Côte d'Ivoire, Democratic Republic of Congo, Ghana, Kenya, Niger, Nigeria, and Republic of the Congo - have also reported a total of 274 probable cases of yellow fever from 1 January 2021 to 26 August 2022 (Table 1).  

The majority of cases over the entire period were reported in the last quarter of 2021 (Figure 1), with Ghana reporting around 33% of all confirmed cases. Of 184 confirmed cases, 73% are aged 30 years and below, and the male-to-female ratio is 1.2. The case count and the number of outbreaks are anticipated to continue evolving as the Region enters the seasonal period when there is often an increase in cases notified. 

Figure 1. Probable and confirmed cases of yellow fever by week of symptom onset in countries reporting transmission in the WHO African Region, 1 January 2021 to 26 August 2022.  



Figure 2. Distribution of probable and confirmed cases of yellow fever in the WHO African Region, 1 January 2021 to 26 August 2022. 



Table 1. Probable and confirmed cases of yellow fever and deaths by country in the WHO African Region, 1 January 2021 to 26 August 2022. 



Epidemiology
Yellow fever is an epidemic-prone, vaccine-preventable disease caused by an arbovirus transmitted to humans by the bites of infected Aedes and Haemagogus mosquitoes. The incubation period ranges from 3 to 6 days. Many people do not experience symptoms, but when they occur the most common are fever, muscle pain with prominent backache, headache, loss of appetite, and nausea or vomiting. In most cases, symptoms clear after 3 to 4 days. A small proportion of cases progress to the toxic phase with systemic infection affecting the liver and kidneys. These individuals can have more severe symptoms of high-grade fever, abdominal pain with vomiting, jaundice and dark urine caused by acute liver and kidney failure. Bleeding can occur from the mouth, nose, eyes, or stomach.  Death can occur within 7 - 10 days in about half of cases with severe symptoms. 

Yellow fever is prevented by an effective vaccine, which is safe and affordable. A single dose of yellow fever vaccine is sufficient to grant sustained immunity and life-long protection against yellow fever disease. A booster dose of the vaccine is not needed. The vaccine provides effective immunity within 10 days for 80-100% of people vaccinated, and within 30 days for more than 99% of people vaccinated. 

Public health response
WHO is providing coordination and technical support to countries in conducting comprehensive investigations and outbreak response. Response measures by affected countries include: 

Strengthening surveillance and laboratory capacity 

WHO is supporting national authorities with field investigations, including training of health personnel on yellow fever case investigation, review of case investigation reports, and undertaking case classification sessions to ascertain the epidemiological classification of yellow fever cases; 

The Eliminate Yellow fever Epidemics (EYE) strategy continues to support international shipment of yellow fever samples to regional reference laboratories since 2019, as well as ongoing laboratory testing and capacity building; 

Data management activities have been strengthened.   

Vaccination 

Reactive vaccination campaigns (RVC) 

As part of the outbreak response to the reported cases, there have been seven RVC (two in Ghana, two in Chad, and one each in Central African Republic, Cameroon, and Kenya);  
From 1 January 2021 to 26 August 2022, a total of 3 991 568 persons have been vaccinated with support from the International Coordination Group (ICG); 
An additional RVC has been approved by ICG for implementation in Central African Republic and is expected to launch in September 2022 with a target of 345,920 people. 
Preventive mass vaccination campaigns (PMVC) 

PMVC target areas at high risk of virus transmission and inadequate population immunity. In total, approximately 80 million people are expected to be protected by PMVC in 2022; 
Of the countries affected in this outbreak, Nigeria (in select States) and the Republic of the Congo have begun their PMVC this year; the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda have also planned vaccination activities in the last quarter of 2022.
WHO risk assessment
According to the EYE strategy, twenty-seven countries in the African region are high-risk countries for yellow fever based on timing and intensity of yellow fever virus transmission, transmission potential and assessment of urban risk. Re-emergence of yellow fever was reported in 2020 with two outbreaks in West African countries with history of mass vaccination (in Guinea and Senegal, now contained). Since late 2021, the situation has intensified with 12 countries across the region reporting probable and confirmed cases.  

WHO assesses the risk at regional level to be high. Current multi-country outbreaks and active virus circulation in West, Central and East Africa have resulted in increased morbidity and mortality, with continued risk of amplification and spread. The immunization coverage for yellow fever has been suboptimal in most of the affected countries and in specific populations. According to WHO and UNICEF estimates, in 2021, the routine childhood vaccination immunization coverage for yellow fever in the African region was 47%. This is much lower than the 80% threshold required to confer population immunity against yellow fever, indicating that a large population remains susceptible to yellow fever with a risk of continued transmission. 

Immunization coverage by countries reporting probable and confirmed cases in West, Central and East Africa are as follows: Cameroon (54%), Central African Republic (41%), Chad (45%), Republic of the Congo (67%), Côte d’Ivoire (65%), Democratic Republic of the Congo (56%), Gabon (53%), Ghana (94%), Kenya (7%), Niger (80%), and Nigeria (63%). Uganda plans to introduce yellow fever vaccine into routine immunization in August 2022. Further information on immunization coverage can be found here. 

Many countries in West, Central, and East Africa have been facing political instability and insecurity, in addition to concurrent outbreaks (including COVID-19, Ebola virus disease, cholera, meningitis, malaria, monkeypox, circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2), chikungunya, leishmaniasis, plague, Lassa fever, etc.). These could contribute to delayed case investigation and hinder the surveillance and response efforts against yellow fever.  

The risk at global level is assessed to be low as no exported cases of yellow fever linked to these 12 countries with probable or confirmed cases since January 2021 have been reported.

WHO advice
Surveillance: WHO recommends close monitoring of the situation with active cross-border coordination and information sharing, due to the possibility of cases in neighbouring countries. Enhanced surveillance with investigation and laboratory testing of suspect cases is recommended. 

Vaccination: Vaccination is the primary means of prevention and control of yellow fever. Yellow fever vaccination is safe, highly effective and a single dose provides life-long protection. Completion of nation-wide population protection through vaccination will help avert the risk of future outbreaks. WHO supports national plans by countries reporting yellow fever outbreaks to introduce yellow fever vaccination into the routine immunization programme and complete preventive mass vaccination activities to rapidly boost population immunity.  

Vector control: In urban centres, targeted vector control measures are also helpful to interrupt transmission. As a general precaution, WHO recommends avoidance of mosquito bites including the use of repellents and insecticide treated mosquito nets. The greatest risk for transmission of yellow fever virus is during the day and early evening. 

Risk communication: WHO encourages its Member States to take all actions necessary to keep travellers well informed of risks and preventive measures including vaccination. Travellers should be made aware of yellow fever symptoms and signs and instructed to rapidly seek medical advice if presenting signs and symptoms suggestive of yellow fever infection. Returning travellers who are infected may pose a risk for the establishment of local cycles of yellow fever transmission in areas where a competent vector is present. 

International travel and trade: WHO advises against the application of any travel or trade restrictions to the Region. WHO recommends vaccination against yellow fever for all international travellers, aged nine months of age or older, going to areas determined by the WHO to be at risk for yellow fever transmission. For additional areas, the recommendation for vaccination of international travellers is subject to the assessment of the likelihood of exposure of each individual traveller.  Detailed information is available here. 

In accordance with the IHR (2005) third edition, the international certificate of vaccination against yellow fever becomes valid 10 days after vaccination and the validity extends throughout the life of the person vaccinated. A single dose of WHO approved yellow fever vaccine is sufficient to confer sustained immunity and life-long protection against yellow fever disease. A booster dose of the vaccine is not needed and is not required of international travellers as a condition of entry.



Situation at a glance
Yellow fever is endemic in the WHO African Region and was among the top five most frequently reported events in the region in 2019 and 2020. Twenty-seven countries in Africa have been classified as high-risk by the Eliminate Yellow fever Epidemics (EYE) global strategy. From 1 January 2021 to 26 August 2022, a total of 12 countries in the region have reported 184 confirmed cases and 274 probable cases, including 21 deaths, reflecting ongoing complex viral transmission. Risk factors for onward spread and amplification include low population immunity, population movements, viral transmission dynamics, and climate and ecological factors that have contributed to the spread of Aedes mosquitoes. Response measures, most notably reactive and preventive vaccination campaigns, are ongoing in the affected countries. Since the beginning of 2021, over 3.9 million people have been vaccinated through reactive vaccination campaigns in Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Ghana, and Kenya.
Description of the situation
In 2021, nine African countries - Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Côte d'Ivoire, Democratic Republic of Congo, Gabon, Ghana, Nigeria, and Republic of the Congo - reported a total of 151 confirmed cases of yellow fever (for more details, please see the Disease Outbreak News published on 23 December 20211). Of these nine countries, six continue to report confirmed cases of yellow fever with ongoing transmission in 2022, while Côte d'Ivoire and Nigeria have reported probable cases2 and Gabon has not reported further cases since 2021.  

In 2022, two additional countries, Kenya3 and Uganda4, have reported confirmed cases of yellow fever. From 1 January to 26 August 2022, a total of 33 confirmed cases of yellow fever were reported from eight African countries including Central African Republic (33%, 11 cases), Cameroon (24%, eight cases), Democratic Republic of Congo (13%, four cases), Kenya (9%, three cases), Chad (6%, two cases), Republic of the Congo (6%, two cases), Uganda (6%, two cases), and Ghana (3%, one case).  

Ten countries - Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Côte d'Ivoire, Democratic Republic of Congo, Ghana, Kenya, Niger, Nigeria, and Republic of the Congo - have also reported a total of 274 probable cases of yellow fever from 1 January 2021 to 26 August 2022 (Table 1).  

The majority of cases over the entire period were reported in the last quarter of 2021 (Figure 1), with Ghana reporting around 33% of all confirmed cases. Of 184 confirmed cases, 73% are aged 30 years and below, and the male-to-female ratio is 1.2. The case count and the number of outbreaks are anticipated to continue evolving as the Region enters the seasonal period when there is often an increase in cases notified. 

Figure 1. Probable and confirmed cases of yellow fever by week of symptom onset in countries reporting transmission in the WHO African Region, 1 January 2021 to 26 August 2022.  



Figure 2. Distribution of probable and confirmed cases of yellow fever in the WHO African Region, 1 January 2021 to 26 August 2022. 



Table 1. Probable and confirmed cases of yellow fever and deaths by country in the WHO African Region, 1 January 2021 to 26 August 2022. 



Epidemiology
Yellow fever is an epidemic-prone, vaccine-preventable disease caused by an arbovirus transmitted to humans by the bites of infected Aedes and Haemagogus mosquitoes. The incubation period ranges from 3 to 6 days. Many people do not experience symptoms, but when they occur the most common are fever, muscle pain with prominent backache, headache, loss of appetite, and nausea or vomiting. In most cases, symptoms clear after 3 to 4 days. A small proportion of cases progress to the toxic phase with systemic infection affecting the liver and kidneys. These individuals can have more severe symptoms of high-grade fever, abdominal pain with vomiting, jaundice and dark urine caused by acute liver and kidney failure. Bleeding can occur from the mouth, nose, eyes, or stomach.  Death can occur within 7 - 10 days in about half of cases with severe symptoms. 

Yellow fever is prevented by an effective vaccine, which is safe and affordable. A single dose of yellow fever vaccine is sufficient to grant sustained immunity and life-long protection against yellow fever disease. A booster dose of the vaccine is not needed. The vaccine provides effective immunity within 10 days for 80-100% of people vaccinated, and within 30 days for more than 99% of people vaccinated. 

Public health response
WHO is providing coordination and technical support to countries in conducting comprehensive investigations and outbreak response. Response measures by affected countries include: 

Strengthening surveillance and laboratory capacity 

WHO is supporting national authorities with field investigations, including training of health personnel on yellow fever case investigation, review of case investigation reports, and undertaking case classification sessions to ascertain the epidemiological classification of yellow fever cases; 

The Eliminate Yellow fever Epidemics (EYE) strategy continues to support international shipment of yellow fever samples to regional reference laboratories since 2019, as well as ongoing laboratory testing and capacity building; 

Data management activities have been strengthened.   

Vaccination 

Reactive vaccination campaigns (RVC) 

As part of the outbreak response to the reported cases, there have been seven RVC (two in Ghana, two in Chad, and one each in Central African Republic, Cameroon, and Kenya);  
From 1 January 2021 to 26 August 2022, a total of 3 991 568 persons have been vaccinated with support from the International Coordination Group (ICG); 
An additional RVC has been approved by ICG for implementation in Central African Republic and is expected to launch in September 2022 with a target of 345,920 people. 
Preventive mass vaccination campaigns (PMVC) 

PMVC target areas at high risk of virus transmission and inadequate population immunity. In total, approximately 80 million people are expected to be protected by PMVC in 2022; 
Of the countries affected in this outbreak, Nigeria (in select States) and the Republic of the Congo have begun their PMVC this year; the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda have also planned vaccination activities in the last quarter of 2022.
WHO risk assessment
According to the EYE strategy, twenty-seven countries in the African region are high-risk countries for yellow fever based on timing and intensity of yellow fever virus transmission, transmission potential and assessment of urban risk. Re-emergence of yellow fever was reported in 2020 with two outbreaks in West African countries with history of mass vaccination (in Guinea and Senegal, now contained). Since late 2021, the situation has intensified with 12 countries across the region reporting probable and confirmed cases.  

WHO assesses the risk at regional level to be high. Current multi-country outbreaks and active virus circulation in West, Central and East Africa have resulted in increased morbidity and mortality, with continued risk of amplification and spread. The immunization coverage for yellow fever has been suboptimal in most of the affected countries and in specific populations. According to WHO and UNICEF estimates, in 2021, the routine childhood vaccination immunization coverage for yellow fever in the African region was 47%. This is much lower than the 80% threshold required to confer population immunity against yellow fever, indicating that a large population remains susceptible to yellow fever with a risk of continued transmission. 

Immunization coverage by countries reporting probable and confirmed cases in West, Central and East Africa are as follows: Cameroon (54%), Central African Republic (41%), Chad (45%), Republic of the Congo (67%), Côte d’Ivoire (65%), Democratic Republic of the Congo (56%), Gabon (53%), Ghana (94%), Kenya (7%), Niger (80%), and Nigeria (63%). Uganda plans to introduce yellow fever vaccine into routine immunization in August 2022. Further information on immunization coverage can be found here. 

Many countries in West, Central, and East Africa have been facing political instability and insecurity, in addition to concurrent outbreaks (including COVID-19, Ebola virus disease, cholera, meningitis, malaria, monkeypox, circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2), chikungunya, leishmaniasis, plague, Lassa fever, etc.). These could contribute to delayed case investigation and hinder the surveillance and response efforts against yellow fever.  

The risk at global level is assessed to be low as no exported cases of yellow fever linked to these 12 countries with probable or confirmed cases since January 2021 have been reported.

WHO advice
Surveillance: WHO recommends close monitoring of the situation with active cross-border coordination and information sharing, due to the possibility of cases in neighbouring countries. Enhanced surveillance with investigation and laboratory testing of suspect cases is recommended. 

Vaccination: Vaccination is the primary means of prevention and control of yellow fever. Yellow fever vaccination is safe, highly effective and a single dose provides life-long protection. Completion of nation-wide population protection through vaccination will help avert the risk of future outbreaks. WHO supports national plans by countries reporting yellow fever outbreaks to introduce yellow fever vaccination into the routine immunization programme and complete preventive mass vaccination activities to rapidly boost population immunity.  

Vector control: In urban centres, targeted vector control measures are also helpful to interrupt transmission. As a general precaution, WHO recommends avoidance of mosquito bites including the use of repellents and insecticide treated mosquito nets. The greatest risk for transmission of yellow fever virus is during the day and early evening. 

Risk communication: WHO encourages its Member States to take all actions necessary to keep travellers well informed of risks and preventive measures including vaccination. Travellers should be made aware of yellow fever symptoms and signs and instructed to rapidly seek medical advice if presenting signs and symptoms suggestive of yellow fever infection. Returning travellers who are infected may pose a risk for the establishment of local cycles of yellow fever transmission in areas where a competent vector is present. 

International travel and trade: WHO advises against the application of any travel or trade restrictions to the Region. WHO recommends vaccination against yellow fever for all international travellers, aged nine months of age or older, going to areas determined by the WHO to be at risk for yellow fever transmission. For additional areas, the recommendation for vaccination of international travellers is subject to the assessment of the likelihood of exposure of each individual traveller.  Detailed information is available here. 

In accordance with the IHR (2005) third edition, the international certificate of vaccination against yellow fever becomes valid 10 days after vaccination and the validity extends throughout the life of the person vaccinated. A single dose of WHO approved yellow fever vaccine is sufficient to confer sustained immunity and life-long protection against yellow fever disease. A booster dose of the vaccine is not needed and is not required of international travellers as a condition of entry.



Situation at a glance
As of 8 August, the United Republic of Tanzania has reported 20 cases of leptospirosis in two districts in Lindi Region, including three deaths. Of these, 15 cases have been laboratory-confirmed. The majority of cases are men, and all are reported to be farmers, with occupational exposure as the likely source of infection. No new cases have been reported since 15 July. Field investigations and active case finding are ongoing to identify any new or missed cases. Cases of leptospirosis are not unexpected in the United Republic of Tanzania, although reports of outbreaks are rare. Cases tend to have a seasonal distribution, increasing with elevated rainfall or temperature. Transmission usually occurs through direct exposure to infected animal urine or through environmental exposure. This Disease Outbreak News summarizes the epidemiology of the outbreak, provides an overview of the public health response to this event, and WHO advice to the general public and healthcare workers in affected areas.
Description of the situation
On 14 July 2022, the Ministry of Health (MoH) of the United Republic of Tanzania notified WHO of 13 cases of an undiagnosed disease, later diagnosed as leptospirosis. The first two cases presented to a Health Centre located in Ruangwa District, Lindi Region on 5 and 7 July, with symptoms of fever, bleeding from the nose, headache and general body weakness. Samples tested negative for Ebola virus disease, Marburg virus disease, Influenza, Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever, yellow fever, Chikungunya, West Nile virus and Rift Valley fever at the National Public Health Laboratory and the Tanzania Veterinary Laboratory Agency, and subsequently tested positive for leptospirosis at the Sokoine University of Agriculture reference laboratory.

As of 8 August, a total of 20 cases of leptospirosis and three deaths had been reported from two districts including Ruangwa (18 cases) and Kilwa (two cases) in Lindi Region (Figure 1). Of these, 15 cases have been laboratory-confirmed, including one death (case fatality rate 6.7%). Of the remaining five cases, three cases, including one death, tested negative for leptospirosis while samples were not taken for two cases, of which one died.

The cases ranged from 18 to 77 years of age (median age 45 years) and the majority (n=15; 75%) were between 31 and 60 years. Most of the cases (n=15, 75%) were males, who were farmers by occupation and were detected in a temporary camp for agricultural activities.

Cases who reported onset of symptoms from 30 June to 3 July were identified in the community during active case finding. The majority of cases reported onset of symptoms between 2 and 6 July, and the most recent cases reported onset of symptoms on 7 July. No new cases have been reported since 15 July (Figure 2). Field investigations and active case finding are ongoing to identify any new or missed cases.

Figure 1: Geographic distribution of suspected cases of leptospirosis in the United Republic of Tanzania, as of 15 July 2022 



Figure 2: Suspected cases of leptospirosis by onset of symptoms, as of 15 July 2022

Source: United Republic of Tanzania Ministry of Health.

Epidemiology
Leptospirosis is a zoonotic disease caused by the Leptospira genus of bacteria, and a worldwide public health problem attributed to climatic and environmental conditions. Humans become infected through contact with urine (or other body fluids, except saliva) from infected animals, such as rodents, dogs, pigs, cattle, horses, racoons, and wild animals, or contact with water, soil, or food contaminated with the urine of infected animals. Human-to-human transmission occurs only very rarely. The incubation period is usually 7–10 days, with a range of 2–30 days.

Clinical features of leptospirosis include fever, headache, myalgia (particularly in the calf muscle), conjunctival suffusion, jaundice, and general malaise. As these symptoms are similar to other infectious diseases, it is important to correctly diagnose early after the onset of symptoms to treat patients and prevent severe illness. Severe cases include renal and cardiac failure as well as pulmonary hemorrhages and can mimic other epidemic diseases of international importance.

Outbreaks of leptospirosis are rare, with a seasonal distribution, increasing with increased rainfall or higher temperature, and are usually caused by exposure to contaminated water, such as floodwaters or may be associated with changes in human behaviour, animal or sewage contamination of water, changes in animal reservoir density, or following natural disasters. 

Public health response
On 18 July, the MoH issued a press release notifying the outbreak and initiated coordination mechanisms at national and regional levels. A detailed national health sector response plan has been developed.
The MoH, in collaboration with WHO, deployed a multidisciplinary rapid response team to the affected areas and response activities were implemented.
Surveillance activities including epidemiological investigations and active case finding are ongoing. This includes enhanced surveillance for human and animal health.
Training on leptospirosis including integrated disease surveillance and response was conducted for health care workers in Ruangwa district.
Sensitization activities of health care workers on clinical presentation and infection prevention and control (IPC) are ongoing. Leptospirosis factsheets have been printed and distributed to all health care facilities in the affected areas.
Additional samples have been collected from human, animal, and water sources for laboratory testing.
Cases were provided with appropriate medical care. Medicines and medical equipment including personal protective equipment were provided to the region.
Health education is being broadcasted through the local radio station delivering accurate health information to the community and answering their questions.
WHO risk assessment
WHO assesses the overall risk at the national level as moderate. Although the exact source of the outbreak remains unidentified, it is likely linked to farming activities. The affected areas attract farmers from other locations who make temporary settlements while farming and the area has a seasonal influx of farmers, inferring that many other people can be exposed to the same source of contamination and the number of cases may increase.

In addition, the affected areas have limited basic services including water supply, sanitation and hygiene, and health care services. It is therefore anticipated that IPC capacities at the community level would be weak. Moreover, the country’s capacity to respond to this outbreak might become overwhelmed, if the number of cases and affected areas increase in addition to other ongoing health threats. Leptospirosis has been previously reported in the United Republic of Tanzania (2014, in Kigoma Region) and is a recognized public health risk. However, the incidence in different regions is not well known and surveillance capacity is limited.

The risk of disease spread both at regional and global levels is considered Low.

WHO advice
The control of leptospirosis is complicated and will depend on the local conditions. Control can be achieved by controlling the disease reservoir. Preventive measures must be based on a knowledge of the groups at particular risk of infection and the local epidemiological factors. Prevention and control should be targeted at: (a) the infection source; (b) the route of transmission between the infection source and the human host; or (c) infection or disease in the human host.

Transmission can therefore be prevented by:

wearing protective clothing (boots, gloves);
covering skin lesions with waterproof dressings;
washing or showering after exposure to urine splashes or contaminated soil or water;
washing and cleaning wounds;
developing an awareness of potential risks and methods of preventing or minimizing exposure, for instance by avoiding or preventing urine splashes and aerosols, avoiding touching ill or dead animals, fetuses, placentas, organs (kidneys, bladders) with bare hands, and, unless wearing gloves, avoiding assisting animals giving birth;
strictly maintaining hygienic measures during care or handling all animals, including wearing gloves when handling the urine of dogs and other animals, washing hands afterward, and being aware that it is possible to be infected while nursing sick dogs or other animals;
where feasible, disinfecting contaminated areas (scrubbing floors in stables, butcheries, abattoirs, etc.).
providing clean drinking water;
preventing access to or giving adequate warning of water bodies known or suspected to be contaminated (pools, ponds, rivers);
introducing good herd management (avoiding communal pastures, buying certified leptospire-free stock);
implementing standard safety procedures in laboratories.
When an outbreak occurs, both health care workers and the general public need to be rapidly informed of the situation and of the ways in which the disease may be prevented. Widespread community education can greatly assist in the identification of risk factors, the prevention of illness, and reducing the duration of illness and its severity through the early recognition of suspicious symptoms and self-referral for evaluation and treatment.

The general public should be provided with information on the clinical signs of leptospirosis, on the risk of exposure, and on the importance of seeking medical care as soon as possible as the disease responds to antibiotics. Information should also be given on methods of prevention, such as people should avoid drinking or submerging in water that may be contaminated, and not wash clothes in potentially contaminated water if any open wounds are present.

Health care providers should be given information to help them recognize a febrile illness, possibly due to leptospirosis, and on suitable treatments for the disease. Health care workers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed leptospirosis should apply standard and transmission-based IPC precautions. In addition, information on the symptoms of leptospirosis, risk factors, diagnostic testing and therapeutic strategies should be regularly disseminated to health care workers through various channels.

Surveillance activities including active case search should be reinforced in all affected areas and surroundings. The One Health approach should also be strengthened with surveillance activities reinforced not only with regard to human health but also animal and environmental health.

WHO does not recommend any restriction on travel or trade to the United Republic of Tanzania based on the current situation.





Situation at a glance
Dengue is endemic in Bangladesh. As compared to the previous four years (2018 to 2021), the Rohingya refugee/Forcibly Displaced Myanmar Nationals (FDMN) [1] camps in Cox’s Bazar district, are experiencing an acute surge in dengue cases, that started at the end of May 2022 (epi week 22). As of 24 July (end of epi week 29), a total of 7687 confirmed cases and 6 deaths have been reported, with 93% (7178) of the cumulative number of cases being reported since the start of the surge at the end of May 2022 (Figure 1). A similar surge has not been observed in the larger Cox’s Bazar district outside of the Rohingya refugee/FDMN camps nor at the national level with case numbers and trends within expected levels of incidence for the same period. As dengue is recurrent in this part of the country, the population may be at risk of secondary infection, which puts them at higher risk for severe disease.
Description of the situation

From 1 January to 24 July 2022, a total of 7687 cases of dengue, confirmed by rapid diagnostic test (RDT), and six deaths (case fatality rate, 0.08%) have been reported from the  Rohingya refugee/FDMN camps in Cox’s Bazar district, Ukhia Upazila and Teknaf Upazila (sub-districts), with the former sub-district being the most affected of the two. An acute surge of cases began during the week commencing 23 May (epi week 22), and peaked the week ending 26 June (epi week 25), with 93% (7178) of the cumulative number of cases being reported between 23 May and 24 July. A decreasing trend in reported dengue cases was observed following the peak when 1291 cases were reported in epi week 25; however case numbers remain high despite the decline: epi week 26 (1241), epi week 27 (1152), epi week 28 (962), epi week 29 (1000).

Cases of reported dengue in  Rohingya refugee/FDMN camps are significantly higher as compared to similar periods over the past four years; 2018 (4 cases), 2019 (7 cases), 2020 (3 cases), and 2021 (1530 cases and 3 deaths with a surge from October to December) (Figure 1).  However, at a national level and in the larger Cox’s Bazar district, case numbers have been within expected endemic levels of incidence; by comparison to the dengue case from the camps, the larger Cox’s Bazar district reported approximately 121 cases from 1 January to the end of June (epi week 27).  

Camps located in Ukhia Upazila are predominantly affected by the outbreak. Camp 3 accounted for over 50% of all reported cases and Camps 4 and 1W each account for less than 10% of cases as of 24 July 2022. More than two-thirds of cases (67%) were among persons 15 years and older with males accounting for 60% of cases. The majority of cases (81%) were hemodynamically stable – not showing any warning signs for severe dengue syndrome (such as dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) or Dengue Shock syndrome (DSS)) nor having any coexisting conditions – while approximately 15% of cases were mild and required observation and admission to primary health facilities. Severe dengue with signs of DHF and DSS was observed in 0.3% of cases and required admission to Cox’s Bazar District Hospital located within the camp. Among patients admitted to the hospital, 1% required blood transfusion. Previous dengue infection was reported in 1% of current cases.

Serotyping results from 10 samples processed at the Institute of Epidemiology, Disease Control and Research (IEDCR) reference laboratory in the capital Dhaka identified DENV-3 (5 samples), DENV-2 (3 samples). Two samples had inconclusive results.

Dengue is endemic in Bangladesh with recurrent outbreaks. The Rohingya refugee/FDMN camps in Cox’s Bazar district previously experienced an acute dengue outbreak from October to December 2021 during which 1530 cases, including 3 deaths, were reported. Case numbers began to decline at the beginning of 2022, and by the end of February, the event was under control until the resurgence of cases in May 2022.

Figure 1. RDT-confirmed cases of dengue fever in Rohingya refugee/FDMN camps, Cox’s Bazar District, Bangladesh by notification date, 1 January 2018 to 24 July 2022*



* Due to relatively low case numbers in 2018 to 2020, the curves for these years do not appear visible in the chart.

Epidemiology
Dengue is a viral infection transmitted to humans through the bite of infected mosquitoes and is found in tropical and sub-tropical climates worldwide, mostly in urban and semi-urban areas. The primary vectors that transmit the disease are Aedes aegypti mosquitoes and, to a lesser extent, Aedes albopictus.

Dengue virus (DENV) has four serotypes (DENV-1, DENV-2, DENV-3, DENV-4) and it is possible to be infected by each. Infection with one serotype provides long-term immunity to the homologous serotype but not to the other serotypes; sequential infections put people at greater risk for severe dengue. Many DENV infections produce only mild illness; over 80% of cases are asymptomatic. DENV can cause an acute flu-like illness.

There is no specific treatment for dengue; however, timely detection of cases, identifying any warning signs of severe dengue infection, and appropriate case management are key elements of care to prevent patient death and can lower fatality rates of severe infection to below 1%.

Occasional cases acquired overseas have been reported among individuals returning from an area with active dengue transmission, however, there is no conclusive evidence that there have been cases of dengue imported to Bangladesh.

Public health response
The government of Bangladesh and the Health Sector established a multi-sector coordination group and organized meetings with technical partners to manage and coordinate the response.
WHO supported the Bangladesh Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW) to undertake an entomological survey of disease-causing mosquito vectors, including dengue vectors, within and around the camp areas.
WHO led a risk assessment visit to the epicentre of the current outbreak (Camp 3) on 21 June 2022.
WHO, through the Epidemiology Technical Working Group (TWG), continues to provide timely situational updates and guide on appropriate response.
A dengue treatment protocol is being finalized by WHO to guide the detection and management of dengue cases including a referral pathway.
WHO is currently finalizing the protocol on case detection and management.
Cox’s District Referral Hospital and Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) are managing severe cases. Other hospitals and isolation facilities at Primary Health Care Centers (PHC) or dedicated centers are also managing moderate and mild cases.
The International Organization for Migration (IOM) PHC located in Camp 3 has dedicated ten isolation and six observation beds for dengue case management to cope with the surge. 
WHO has procured and is distributing RDT kits to health sector partners to ensure timely diagnosis across all sentinel facilities, some of which have isolation capacity.
Multi-agency integrated response interventions including Water and Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH), environmental management, health, and Risk Communication and Community Engagements (RCCE) are currently being scaled up in the affected camps.
WHO is supporting the transportation of NS1 antigen-positive dengue samples from different health facilities to the IEDCR Reference Laboratory in the capital Dhaka for PCR testing and serotyping.
WHO risk assessment
In August 2017, approximately 700,000 Rohingya nationals fled from Myanmar to Cox’s Bazar district, joining more than 200,000 Rohingya nationals already present, and settling into informal makeshift camps, marked by inadequate access to potable water or quality sanitation and challenging living conditions. The speed and magnitude of the influx exerted pressure on existing resources, strained healthcare services, water, and other social amenities. As a result, there have been high levels of global acute malnutrition (GAM) in children under five years; persistent transmission of acute watery diarrhoea (AWD); recurrent cholera epidemics that are transitioning into an endemic state; persistent diphtheria transmission since 2017; and occasional upsurges of measles, varicella, and skin infections.

Dengue virus has the potential to cause epidemics resulting in high morbidity and mortality.  In Bangladesh, hospital capacity is limited and further increases in severe dengue cases may pose considerable challenges in case management. The Severe Acute Respiratory Infections Treatment Centres (SARI ITC) bed occupancy for COVID-19 admissions is 26% as of 26 June. As hospitals become burdened with people affected by the COVID-19 virus, the increase in hospitalized dengue cases may put undue strain on healthcare capacities.

Currently, the district of Cox’s Bazar can detect dengue using RDTs done in approximately 50 sentinel sites distributed across the 33 camps located in Ukhia and Teknaf Upazilas (sub-districts). There is currently no capacity for dengue virus serotyping at Cox’s Bazar Medical College Laboratory.

Cox’s Bazar previously experienced an acute dengue outbreak from October to December 2021. The current surge in dengue cases could be considered a continuation of last year’s transmission. As dengue is recurrent in this part of the country, the population may be at risk of a secondary infection that may lead to serious complications if not treated promptly and adequately.

Key challenges experienced during last year’s dengue upsurge included delays in the international procurement process for dengue RDT kits, the long process necessary for undertaking dengue virus serotype in the capital Dhaka given such capacity is not available in Cox’s Bazar, and weak vector surveillance and control.

In addition to the COVID-19 pandemic, other ongoing health events such as cholera/AWD (persistent low level of transmission) and diphtheria (persistent low level of transmission since September 2021) may pose additional challenges in response measures by competing for resources. 

Population movement is now more pronounced in Bangladesh with the relaxation of COVID19-related movement restrictions. Cox’s Bazar does not have a direct international point of entry. However, it is close to the seaport in Chattogram and has a domestic airport that receives a large volume of local and international tourists and international humanitarian workers. These factors increase the possibility of international dengue introduction and spread.

WHO advice
The proximity of mosquito vector breeding sites to human habitation is a significant risk factor for dengue virus infection. Although dengue does not spread from human to human, Aedes species mosquitoes can become infected after biting dengue-infected individuals, thus creating a cycle of transmission capable of spreading dengue and leading to clusters of cases.

Vector control activities should focus on all areas where there is a risk of human-vector contact. WHO promotes a strategic approach known as Integrated Vector Management (IVM) to control mosquito vectors. IVM should be enhanced to remove potential breeding sites, reduce vector populations, and minimize individual exposure. This should involve vector control strategies for larvae and adult mosquitoes, including:

Environmental management (i.e., source reduction by improving water storage practices) and eliminating stagnant pools of water.
Larviciding non-potable waters using WHO prequalified larvicides
Distribution of insecticide-treated nets (ITNs) in severely affected camps
Provision of ITNs for fever/dengue inpatients in health facilities.
Indoor space spraying (fogging) is another approach for rapid containment of a dengue outbreak but may be challenging to deliver in densely populated areas within camps. Larvicidal prevention measures recommended by MOHFW and WHO are considered more impactful in breaking transmission compared to the targeting of adult mosquitoes with fogging and fumigation.

Personal protective measures during outdoor activities include the topical application of repellents to exposed skin or treatment of clothing, and the use of long sleeves shirts and pants. Indoor protection can include the use of household insecticide aerosol products or mosquito coils. Window and door screens, as well as air conditioning, can reduce the probability of mosquitoes entering the house. Insecticide-treated nets offer good protection to people against mosquito bites while sleeping during the day. Since Aedes mosquitoes are active at dawn and dusk, personal protective measures are recommended particularly at these times of day.

Entomological surveillance should be undertaken to assess the breeding potential of Aedes mosquitoes in containers as well as conducting insecticide resistance testing for vector control intervention.

Rapid detection of severe dengue cases and timely referrals to tertiary hospitals can reduce mortality. Case surveillance should continue to be enhanced in all affected areas and across the country. Where feasible, resources should be allocated to the strengthening of sample referral mechanism for the confirmation and sub-typing of the dengue virus.

WHO does not recommend that any general travel or trade restrictions be applied to Bangladesh based on the information available for this event.









Situation at a glance
Two fatal cases of Marburg virus disease (MVD) were reported from Ashanti region, Ghana. On 28 June 2022, these cases were notified to health authorities as suspected viral hemorrhagic fever (VHF) cases and tested positive for Marburg virus on 1 July 2022. An outbreak of MVD has only been reported once previously in West Africa, and this is the first time MVD has been notified in Ghana. An outbreak of MVD may represent a serious public health threat as it is severe and often fatal.
Description of the situation
On 28 June 2022, two suspected viral hemorrhagic fever (VHF) cases were notified to health authorities in the Ashanti region, Ghana (Figure 1). This region is located in the middle belt of Ghana and is the most populated region in the country.  

The first case was a 26-year-old male who was a farm worker in Adansi North district, Ashanti region with a travel history to the Western region. Prior to symptom onset on 24 June, he arrived from the Western region to Ashanti region. He sought care at a hospital on 26 June and died on 27 June. The case was transported and buried in the Sawla-Tuna-Kalba district, Savannah region, which borders both Burkina Faso and Côte d’Ivoire. The burial was conducted before the results of laboratory tests for MVD were available. 

The second case was a 51-year-old male who was a farm worker in Bekwai Municipal, Ashanti region. He sought care at the same hospital as the first case on 28 June but died the same day.  

Both cases presented with fever, general malaise, bleeding from the nose and mouth, and subconjunctival bleeding (bleeding of the blood vessels in the eyes). Blood samples were collected on 27 June for the first case and 28 June for the second case and sent to Noguchi Memorial Institute of Medicine Research (NMIMR) for testing. On 1 July, both cases tested positive for Marburg virus by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).  On 12 July, samples collected from the two cases were sent to Institute Pasteur in Dakar, Senegal (IPD) which confirmed the results from NMIMR on 14 July 2022. 

Figure 1. Region of the two confirmed cases of Marburg virus disease reported in Ghana, as of 20 July 2022  



The source of infection is unknown. Preliminary investigations have shown that neither of these cases had a history of contact with dead animals, sick persons, or animals and had not attended any social gathering within three weeks of symptoms onset. Although both cases were farmers, they worked in different locations, and they have not been found to be epidemiologically linked. However, both cases came from communities living in a forest environment. 

A cumulative number of 108 individuals (50 from Ashanti region, 48 from Savannah region, and 10 from the Western region) were identified as contacts of the two cases, all of whom were under self-quarantine and daily monitoring for 21 days. On 20 July, all contacts completed their follow up period. These contacts included health care workers and immediate family members of the cases. One contact reported some symptoms, but a blood sample that was collected tested negative at NMIMR on 7 July. All the other contacts reported to be in good health during the follow up period. 


Epidemiology
MVD is an epidemic-prone disease associated with high case fatality ratios (CFR; 24-88%). In the early course of the disease, the clinical diagnosis of MVD is difficult to distinguish from many other tropical febrile illnesses due to the similarities in the clinical symptoms. Other VHFs need to be excluded, particularly Ebola virus disease, as well as malaria, typhoid fever, leptospirosis, rickettsial infections, and plague. Human MVD infection can result from prolonged exposure to mines or caves inhabited by Rousettus bat colonies. Marburg virus spreads through human-to-human transmission via direct contact (through broken skin or mucous membranes) with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected people, and with surfaces and materials (e.g., bedding, clothing) contaminated with these fluids. 

Although there are no vaccines or antiviral treatments approved to treat the virus, supportive care – rehydration with oral or intravenous fluids – and treatment of specific symptoms, improve survival. A range of potential treatments, including blood products, immune therapies, and drug therapies, are being evaluated. 

In 2021, an outbreak of MVD was reported for the first time in West Africa in Guinea.

Public health response
National and international coordination involving key partners are ongoing to respond to this outbreak.  

The Ministry of Health of Ghana is coordinating response activities and is engaging with partners for support, as needed.   
The Ashanti region health directorate established coordination mechanisms in the affected health districts and response activities have commenced.  
Epidemiological investigations continue to be conducted, including enhanced surveillance using the Integrated disease surveillance and Response (IDSR) system and follow-up of contacts.  Eight alerts have been reported from Ashanti, Oti and Western regions. Following investigations, seven alerts were discarded and one alert from Oti region tested positive for yellow fever.  
Sensitization activities of health care workers on case definition and infection prevention and control measures are ongoing.  
The NMIMR laboratory has the capacity to test for viral hemorrhagic fevers and is testing samples resulting from alerts. To date, 15 samples were tested for Marburg virus, and all samples tested negative. Sequencing of the virus is ongoing.  
A designated hospital has been identified in Ashanti region to isolate and care for additional cases.  
WHO is deploying technical experts to support the country in strengthening Infection Prevention and Control (IPC), coordination, surveillance, and conducting investigations assessing risks for further outbreaks. 
An orientation has been held for community-based surveillance volunteers to enhance surveillance at the community level. 
WHO is offering testing support in the form of supplying reagents to NMIMR which first tested the samples. 
Côte d’Ivoire and Burkina Faso have been informed of the event and are initiating preparedness activities. 
WHO risk assessment
The risk of this outbreak is high at the national level, moderate at the regional level, and low at the global level. The notification of two confirmed cases of MVD with a CFR of 100% (2/2) raises concern. The epidemiological investigation has not yet identified the source of this outbreak, which highlights the need to intensify the community-based surveillance.  

There is a risk for this outbreak to spread to neighboring countries because the first case travelled from Western region prior to symptoms onset. The Western region shares a border with Côte d’Ivoire, and this may present a risk of transborder transmission if more cases continue to be reported or affect other areas. In addition, the first case was not buried safely in Savannah region which also borders Côte d’Ivoire and Burkina Faso. Therefore, WHO has assessed the risk of this outbreak as high at the national level, moderate at the regional level, and low at the global level.


WHO advice
Community engagement activities need to be carried out in the three identified regions in Ghana (Ashanti, Savannah and Western regions) with a particular focus on providing adequate information and support for the population to implement measures to prevent further transmission, avoid stigmatization within the community, and encourage early presentation to treatment centers and other necessary outbreak containment measures, including safe burials.  

It is also important to raise awareness of the risk factors for MVD infection and the protective measures that individuals can take to reduce human exposure to the virus. Key public health communication messages include: 
Reducing the risk of human-to-human transmission in the community arising from direct or close contact with infected patients, particularly with their body fluids. Close physical contact with Marburg patients should be avoided. Gloves and appropriate personal protective equipment should be worn when taking care of ill patients at home. Regular hand washing should be performed after visiting sick relatives in hospital, as well as after taking care of ill patients at home. 
Reducing the risk of bat-to-human transmission. Handle wildlife with gloves and other appropriate protective clothing. Cook animal products (blood and meat) thoroughly before consumption and avoid consuming raw meat. During work, research activities, or tourist visits in mines or caves inhabited by fruit bat colonies, wear gloves and other appropriate protective clothing including masks.
Outbreak containment measures should be continued and strengthened in the three regions of Ghana. These measures include:  

Maintaining and building trust with communities 
Scaling-up surveillance activities (active case search, contact monitoring, and investigation)  
Testing all suspected cases of MVD in a timely manner 
Ensuring that adequate infection prevention and control measures are implemented when caring for suspected, probable and confirmed patients 
Isolating early, and caring for suspected and confirmed cases, if possible, in designated health facilities with trained health workers and adequate IPC measures.  
Performing safe and dignified burial of deceased individuals who are probable or confirmed cases of MVD.
Marburg virus transmission has previously been reported in health care settings when appropriate infection prevention and control (IPC) measures were not implemented. IPC measures to reduce risk of transmission in health care include: 

Establish an IPC task force in the health zone to ensure implementation of the Infection prevention and control activities  
Ensure health workers are briefed on MVD (standard and transmission-based precautions) including an emphasis on safe injection practices  
Ensure minimum WASH and isolation requirements and capacity are met in health facilities.
Based on the current risk assessment WHO advises against any restriction of travel and trade to Ghana. 


Situation at a glance
Cholera is endemic in Somalia with recurrent outbreaks reported since 2017. Between 1 January to 10 July 2022, a cumulative number of 7796 cases of cholera including 37 associated deaths (case fatality ratio 0.5%) have been reported from 25 drought-affected districts. The current cholera outbreak is taking place in the context of other ongoing outbreaks, high rates of malnutrition, and the escalating drought, all of which are exacerbating the fragility of Somalia’s humanitarian situation and have led to large displacement of people, placing additional pressure on an already over-burdened and underperforming healthcare system. Currently, the country has limited capacity to respond to the outbreak, increasing the risk of serious public health impact.
Description of the situation
From 1 January to 10 July 2022, according to the Ministry of Health Somalia (MOH), a cumulative number of 7796 cases of cholera including 37 associated deaths (CFR: 0.5%) have been reported from 25 drought-affected districts in Banadir region, South-West state and Hirshabelle state (Table-1). The districts reporting the highest number of cases include Baidoa (2033), Daynile (1080), Jowhar (825) and Afgoi (681). In addition to being the drought-affected districts, many of these districts also host Internally Displaced Populations (IDP) in camps resulting from three decades of conflict and the escalating drought situation.

Over half of the cases (53.5%) were among children below two years of age, with males and females equally affected. Severe dehydration was reported in 27% of cases.  None of the cases reported having received Oral Cholera Vaccine (OCV).  OCV campaigns were carried out in Somalia in 2017, 2018 and 2019.

As of 10 July, a total of 677 stool samples were collected and analyzed (by culture) by the National Public Health laboratory in Mogadishu. Of these, 145 samples (21.4%) tested positive for Vibrio cholerae Ogawa 01.

The number of cases reported in the first six months of 2022 has exceeded the number of cases reported in 2021 in the same drought affected districts, when a total of 6205 acute watery diarrhoea (AWD)/suspected cholera cases including 39 deaths (CFR:0.63%) were reported. In 2021, the outbreak started following flash floods.

Table-1: Number of cholera cases, deaths, case fatality ratios and attack rates by districts in Somalia; from 1 January to 10 July 2022(epidemiological week 1-27, 2022)



Figure: 1- Geographic distribution of cholera cases in Somalia (%) from 1 January to 10 July 2022



Figure 2:  Number of suspected cholera cases in Somalia reported from 1 January 2021 through 10 July 2022



Epidemiology
Cholera is an acute enteric infection caused by ingesting the bacteria Vibrio cholerae present in contaminated water or food. It is mainly linked to insufficient access to safe drinking water and inadequate sanitation. It is an extremely virulent disease that can cause severe acute watery diarrhoea resulting in high morbidity and mortality, and can spread rapidly, depending on the frequency of exposure, the exposed population and the setting. Cholera affects both children and adults and can be fatal if untreated.

The incubation period is between 12 hours and five days after ingestion of contaminated food or water. Most people infected with V. cholerae do not develop any symptoms, although the bacteria are present in their faeces for 1-10 days after infection and are shed back into the environment, potentially infecting other people. Among people who develop symptoms, the majority have mild or moderate symptoms, while a minority develop acute watery diarrhoea with severe dehydration. Cholera is an easily treatable disease. Most people can be treated successfully through prompt administration of oral rehydration solution (ORS).

Cholera can be endemic or epidemic. A cholera-endemic area is an area where confirmed cholera cases were detected during the last three years with evidence of local transmission (cases are not imported from elsewhere). A cholera epidemic can occur in both endemic countries and in non-endemic countries. Uninfected dead bodies have never been reported as the source of epidemics.

The consequences of a humanitarian crisis – such as disruption of water and sanitation systems, or the displacement of populations to inadequate and overcrowded camps – can increase the risk of cholera transmission, should the bacteria be present or introduced.

A multisectoral approach including a combination of surveillance, improving access to clean water, sanitation, and hygiene promotion, rapid access to treatment, risk communication and community engagement and oral cholera vaccines is essential to control cholera outbreaks and to reduce deaths.

Public health response
Emergency response activities are being conducted by the MOH, WHO and other partners. These measures include:

The use of an Incident Management System at the national level to coordinate drought response including cholera response activities.
A Cholera Task Force was established to coordinate the implementation of cholera response activities including the implementation of reactive OCV campaigns.
The first round of reactive oral cholera vaccination campaign was conducted (14-26 June 2022) in the nine high-risk districts and 897 086 (96%) of the people aged one year and above including pregnant women have been vaccinated against cholera.
Activation of an Early Warning Alert and Response Network (EWARN) in drought affected districts is ongoing including community health workers who detect and report community alerts.
Deployment of district based rapid response teams to investigate alerts of acute watery diarrhoea (AWD) reported from health facilities and communities.
Provision of state-based laboratories with reagents and other relevant supplies for the confirmation of cholera cases.
Prepositioning of essential supplies for the detection of suspected cholera by rapid diagnostic test (RDTs) and the management of cholera cases in remote communities.
Health sensitization sessions targeting people living in IDP camps conducted by health cluster partners along with the MOH.
Implementation of water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) interventions including the distribution of hygienic kits to displaced communities are ongoing.
WASH cluster, in collaboration with MOH, is conducting water quality monitoring and chlorination of contaminated water sources.
Hygiene kits have been distributed to districts reporting high numbers of cases.
Six cholera treatment centres have been established in high-risk districts.  
WHO risk assessment
In 2017, more than 78 000 suspected cholera cases including 1159 deaths (CFR 1.5%) were reported in Somalia. Transmission has continued since, with 6761 suspected cholera cases and 45 deaths (CFR 0.67%) reported in 2018; 3100 cases and four deaths (CFR 0.13%) reported in 2019; 6414 cases and 44 deaths (CFR 0.69%) reported in 2020 and 6205 AWD/cholera cases and 39 deaths (CFR 0.63%) reported in 2021.

The current cholera outbreak in Somalia is taking place in the context of other ongoing outbreaks (including COVID-19, measles), as well as the escalating drought that has affected seven million people and displaced      805 000 people to camps according to the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs  (UNOCHA), putting pressure on an already overstretched health-care system with limited primary healthcare services. The Somalia Food Security and Nutrition Unit has reported that multiple areas face a risk of famine during the current drought and under escalating food prices with more than 45% of the population classified as Integrated Food Insecurity Phase Classification (IPC) 3 (Crisis) [1] and more. The drought has further stretched response capacity in Somalia.

Additionally, the current cholera outbreak has been confirmed in 25 drought affected districts, which hosts displaced communities who have limited access to safe water, proper sanitation and access to food.

Although there is currently no evidence of cross-border spread of the outbreak, international spread cannot be ruled out given the escalating drought conditions across the Horn of Africa, which has led to repeated displacement and extensive cross-border population movement between Somalia and nearby countries especially Ethiopia, Kenya, Djibouti and Yemen. These countries are also experiencing similar conditions (limited access to safe water, proper sanitation and food) that may facilitate the transmission of diarrheal disease, especially affecting displaced communities.

WHO advice
WHO recommends strengthening of disease surveillance systems, and proper and timely case management of cholera cases. Oral cholera vaccines should be used in conjunction with improvements in water and sanitation to control cholera outbreaks and for prevention in areas known to be at high risk for cholera. Improving access to safe drinking water and sanitation infrastructure, as well as improving infection, prevention and control in healthcare facilities, with hygiene practices and food safety in affected communities, are the most effective means of controlling cholera. Key public health communication messages should be provided to the population.

Specifically, in Somalia, despite ongoing response activities there is an urgent need to reinforce the following actions in drought affected districts:

Deploy additional district rapid response teams and community health workers to detect and report alerts and conduct risk communication.
Build the capacity of frontline health workers in clinical management of cholera cases.
Preposition of cholera kits.
Establish Oral Rehydration Points (ORPs) in the affected communities, supporting linkages of ORPs to Cholera Treatment Centers (CTCs).
Scale-up of community awareness and sensitization campaigns.
Strengthening the implementation of WASH interventions in drought affected districts.
Develop an updated cholera response plan to stream line coordination for cholera response.
WHO does not recommend any travel or trade restrictions for Somalia based on the currently available information.




Situation at a glance
As of 8 July 2022, 35 countries in five WHO Regions have reported 1010 probable cases of severe acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology in children, which fulfill the WHO case definition, including 22 deaths. Since the previous Disease Outbreak News published on 24 June 2022, 90 new probable cases and four additional deaths have been reported to WHO. Additionally, two new countries, Luxembourg and Costa Rica, have reported probable cases. WHO has launched a global survey with an aim to estimate the incidence of severe acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology in 2022 compared to the previous five years, to understand where cases and liver transplants are occurring at higher-than-expected rates. This Disease Outbreak News provides updates on the epidemiology of the outbreak, as well as updates on the response to this event, including the launch of the clinical case report form on the WHO Global Clinical Platform, and updates on Infection Prevention and Control (IPC) and risk communication and community engagement (RCCE).
Description of the situation
Between 5 April (when the outbreak was initially detected) and 8 July 2022, 35 countries in five WHO Regions have reported 1010 probable cases (Figure 1) and 22 deaths. These include new and retrospectively identified cases since 1 October 2021, which fit the WHO case definition as stated below. There are three additional countries that have reported cases which are pending classification and are not included in the cumulative probable case count. Of the probable cases, 46 (5%) children have required transplants, and 22 (2%) deaths have been reported to WHO.

Almost half (48%) of the probable cases have been reported from the WHO European Region (21 countries reporting 484 cases), including 272 cases (27% of global cases) from the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (the UK) (Table 1, Figure 2). The second highest number of probable cases have been reported from the Region of the Americas (n=435, including 334 cases (33% of global cases) from the United States of America), followed by the Western Pacific Region (n=70), the South-East Asia Region (n=19) and Eastern Mediterranean Region (n=2). Seventeen countries are reporting more than five probable cases. The actual number of cases may be underestimated, in part due to the limited enhanced surveillance systems in place. The case count is expected to change as more information and verified data become available.

Figure 1. Distribution of probable cases of severe acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology in children by country, as of 8 July 2022 (n=1010), 5 PM CEST



Table 1. Distribution of probable cases of severe acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology in children by WHO Region since 1 October 2021, as of 8 July 2022, 5 PM CEST

WHO Region	Probable cases	Cases requiring liver transplants	SARS-CoV-2 positive by PCR
(Number of positive cases)
 	Adenovirus positive by PCR⸸
(Number of positive cases)	Adenovirus type 41
(Number of positive cases)	Deaths
Americas	435	24	18	9	1	13
Eastern Mediterranean	2	0	Not available	1	Not available	1
Europe	484	22	54	193	30	2
Southeast-Asia	19	0	Not available	Not available	Not available	6
Western Pacific	70	0	6	6	0	0
Cumulative*	1010	46	78	209	31	22
*The information included in this table contains data notified under IHR (2005), including from The European Surveillance System (TESSY) and official sources detected through event-based surveillance activities within the Public Health Intelligence process. Further information is presented in the Annex table.

⸸ Adenovirus positive in any specimen type (respiratory, urine, stool, whole blood, serum, other, or unknown specimen type) 

Laboratory testing of cases

Based on the working case definition for probable cases (Box 1), laboratory testing has excluded hepatitis A-E viruses in these children. Pathogens like adenovirus and SARS-CoV-2 were detected by PCR in a number of the cases, although the data reported to WHO are incomplete.

Adenovirus continues to be the most frequently detected pathogen among cases with available data. In the European region, adenovirus was detected by PCR in 52% of cases (193/368) with available results (see Annex). In Japan, adenovirus was detected in 9% of cases (5/58) with known results. Due to limited adenovirus surveillance in most countries, it is challenging to assess whether these rates are higher than the expected rates in the population.

SARS-CoV-2 has been detected in a number of cases, however, data on serology results are limited. In the European region, SARS-CoV-2 was detected by PCR in 16% of cases (54/335) with available results (see Annex). Preliminary reports from the United States of America indicate that SARS-CoV-2 was detected in 8% of cases (15/197) with available results. In Japan, SARS-CoV-2 was also detected in 8% of cases (5/59) with available results. These figures may change as new data becomes available.  

For further details, please refer to the EURO/ECDC Joint surveillance report, Japanese National Institute of Infectious Diseases report, UKHSA Case Update, UKHSA Third Technical Briefing, and the USCDC Technical Report.

Most reported cases did not appear to be epidemiologically linked; however, epidemiologically linked cases have been reported in Scotland, and the Netherlands.

Box 1. WHO Working case definition of severe acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology



Epidemiological characteristics of cases

Of 571 probable cases (57% of all probable cases) for which data are available, there has been a decreasing trend in cases over the last month (Figure 2). However, this trend should be interpreted carefully as there are reporting delays and limited surveillance in many countries.

Figure 2. Epidemiological curve of probable cases of severe acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology with available data, by week, by WHO region, as of 8 July 2022 (n=571), 5 PM CEST



Note: Figure 2 includes cases for which dates of symptom onset, hospitalization, or notification were reported to WHO (n= 571). The date of symptom onset was used when available (n=384). If unavailable, the week of hospitalization (n=163), or the week of notification (n=24), was used.

As of 8 July 2022, of 479 cases with information on gender and age, 48% are male (n=232), and the majority of cases (76%, n=364) are under six years of age (Figure 3).

Figure 3. Age and gender distribution of reported probable cases of severe acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology with available data, as of 8 July 2022 (n=479) 5 PM CEST


 

Out of 100 probable cases with available clinical data, the most commonly reported symptoms on presentation were nausea or vomiting (60% of cases), jaundice (53% of cases), general weakness (52% of cases) and abdominal pain (50% of cases).

Of all global cases with available data, a total of 167 cases (16% of all probable cases) had both date of symptom onset and date of hospitalization available. Among these, the median number of days between date of symptom onset and date of hospitalization was four days [interquartile range (IQR) 7]. 

Public health response
Epidemiological, clinical, laboratory, histopathological and toxicological investigations of the possible aetiology (or aetiologies) of the cases are underway by several national authorities, research networks, across different working groups in WHO and with partners. This includes detailed epidemiological investigations to identify common exposures, risk factors or links between cases.

On 11 July 2022, WHO launched a global online survey with an aim to estimate the incidence of severe acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology in 2022 compared to the previous five years, to understand where cases and liver transplants are occurring at higher-than-expected rates. WHO has shared the voluntary survey across nine global and regional networks of paediatric hepatologists and other specialist paediatricians working in major national units, requesting aggregated data as part of the global event investigation. Interim results of the survey will be made available publicly by WHO as soon as they are available.  

The specific objectives of the survey are to:

Assess whether there has been a recent increase or not in incidence of severe acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology (with and without acute liver failure) in children ≤16 years, including those requiring liver transplantation, in different countries and regions (number of cases in 2022 compared to 2017-2021)
Assess any changes in the age distribution and severity of reported cases over time (2022 compared to 2017-2021). 
WHO risk assessment
The risk at the global level is currently assessed as moderate considering the following factors:

The aetiology of this severe acute hepatitis remains unknown and is being investigated. 
Limited epidemiological, laboratory, histopathological and clinical information are currently available to WHO.
The actual number of cases and the geographical distribution may be underestimated, in part due to the limited enhanced surveillance systems in place.
The possible mode of transmission of the aetiologic agent(s) has not been determined.
Although there are still no available reports of healthcare-associated infections, human-to-human transmission cannot be ruled out following a few early reports of epidemiologically linked cases.
WHO advice
Laboratory testing

WHO has developed interim guidance for Member States on testing considerations and strategies for suspect cases of severe acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology in children. The guidance includes advice to support Member States with diagnostic prioritization and can be modified for regional considerations of endemic diseases. The guidance also considers assessments for other aetiological factors of severe acute hepatitis in children, including other infectious agents, environmental exposures (toxins, medications), metabolic hereditary conditions, or autoimmune disorders, which should be considered in consultation with a paediatric hepatologist.

Prioritization should be given to routine collection of various specimens from as early after symptom onset as possible, to allow for later testing as required and to identify aetiology(ies). If laboratory capacity is limited, storage and referral to regional or global laboratories should be considered for the suggested investigative diagnostics. Any positive specimens should also be stored for further testing and/or investigation.

To further support Member States with laboratory testing, WHO is establishing a network of regional and global referral laboratories.

For more information, please see the Interim guidance on Laboratory testing for severe acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology in children.

Case reporting

WHO strongly encourages Member States to report cases of severe acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology in children matching WHO’s case definition, through established IHR mechanisms. For more information, please see the Suggested minimum variables for reporting cases of severe acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology in children.

Reporting clinical data through the WHO Global Clinical Platform

WHO has developed a clinical Case Report Form (CRF) to facilitate reporting of anonymized case-based data. The analysis of standardized global clinical data will contribute to understanding the aetiology as well as clinical characterization of disease, its natural history and severity; aiming to guide the public health response and the development of clinical management guidance including approaches to investigations and infection prevention and control interventions.  WHO strongly encourages Member States’ participation in the Global Clinical Platform for all cases meeting the WHO case definition, even if the CRF cannot be fully completed. Patient clinical data may be collected prospectively or retrospectively through examination and review of medical records.   

The clinical CRF can be accessed through the WHO Global Clinical Platform for severe acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology.

Infection Prevention and Control

Until more is known about the aetiology of these cases, WHO advises implementation of general infection prevention and control (IPC) practices including:

Performing frequent hand hygiene, using soap and water or an alcohol-based hand-gel
Avoiding crowded spaces and maintaining a distance from others
Ensuring good ventilation when indoors
Wearing a well-fitted mask covering your mouth and nose when appropriate
Covering coughs and sneezes
Using safe water for drinking
Following the Five Keys to Safer Food: (1) keep clean; (2) separate raw and cooked; (3) cook thoroughly; (4) keep food at safe temperatures; and (5) use safe water and raw materials. Regular cleaning of frequently touched surfaces
Staying home when unwell and seeking medical attention
Health facilities should adhere to standard precautions and implement contact and droplet precautions for suspected or probable cases.

Risk communication and community engagement

Until more is known about the aetiology of these cases and appropriate prevention measures, WHO advises that information is shared on general IPC practices. Efforts to communicate with empathy in a timely and transparent way, acknowledging what is known and unknown and what is being done to investigate will help to reassure parents and caregivers, maintaining trust in health authorities and interventions.

Annex table. Classification of reported probable cases of severe acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology by country since 1 October 2021, as of 8 July 2022

WHO regions	Country	Probable/epi-linked cases*	Cases requiring liver transplants (cumulative 46)	SARS-CoV-2 positive by PCR (cumulative 78)#	Adenovirus positive by PCR (cumulative 209) ⸸	Adenovirus type 41 (cumulative 31)
Europe	Austria	3	0	1/3	0/3	 
 	Belgium	14	0	3/14	2/7	 
 	Bulgaria	1	0	0 / 1	0/1	 
 	Cyprus	2	0	0 /1	1/2	0/1
 	Denmark	8	0	2/8	0/7	0
 	France	8	0	0 / 8	4/6	0/1
 	Greece	12	0	0/9	2/10	 
 	Ireland	17	2	0 / 8	9/16	 
 	Israel	5	 	0 / 2	 1 / 2	 
 	Italy	36	1	2/19	11/25	 
 	Latvia	1	0	 	1/1	 
 	Luxembourg⸹	1	0	0/1	0/1	 
 	Republic of Moldova	1	0	0 / 1	0 / 1	 
 	Netherlands	15	3	1/4	4/9	0/0
 	Norway	5	0	2/5	2/5	2/2
 	Poland	11	0	0/2	2/5	 
 	Portugal	19	0	4/14	2/13	0/1
 	Serbia	1	1 awaiting	0 / 1	1/1	 
 	Spain	40	1	3/29	5/28	1/2
 	Sweden	12	2, including 1 awaiting	2/9	4/9	 
 	United Kingdom (the)	272	12	34/196	142/216	27 / 35
Americas	Argentina	3	1	0	2	1
 	Brazil	2	0	0	0	0
 	Canada	21	2	3/20	3/18	0/1
 	Colombia	2	0	0	1	0
 	Costa Rica⸹	3	 	 	3	 
 	Mexico	69	0	 	 	 
 	Panama	1	0	 	 	 
 	United States of America	334	21	15/197	 	 
Western Pacific Region	Japan 	67	0	5/59	5/58	0
 	Singapore	3	0	1	1	0
Southeast-Asia	Indonesia	18	0	 	 	 
Maldives	1	0	 	 	 
Eastern Mediterranean	occupied Palestinian territories	1	0	 	 	 
 	Qatar	1	 	 	1	 
Blank cells indicate where no data was available at the time of this report.

*The information included in this table contains data notified under IHR (2005), including from The European Surveillance System (TESSY) and official sources detected through event-based surveillance activities within the Public Health Intelligence process.

#All specimens with known test result (negative, or positive) were included in the denominator.

⸸ Adenovirus positive in any specimen type (respiratory, urine, stool, whole blood, serum, other, or unknown specimen type) / number of cases with adenovirus test result in any specimen type. Any specimens with known test result (negative or positive) were included in the denominator.

⸹ Newly reported countries in this update


Situation at a glance
On 4 July 2022, the Ministry of Health (MoH) of the Democratic Republic of the Congo declared the end of the Ebola virus disease (EVD) outbreak that affected Mbandaka and Wangata health zones, Equateur province. In accordance with WHO recommendations, the declaration was made 42 days (twice the maximum incubation period) after the burial of the last confirmed case who died in the community.
Description of the situation
Between 23 April and 3 July 2022, a total of five (four confirmed and one probable) cases of EVD, including five deaths (case fatality ratio 100%), were reported from three health areas in Equateur province. All health areas are in Mbandaka city; Mama Balako health area in Wangata health zone, and Libiki and Motema Pembe health areas in Mbandaka health zone. (Figure 1).  

The Ministry of Health of the Democratic Republic of the Congo declared the outbreak on 23 April after confirmation of Ebola virus  ina 31-year-old male (the index case) from Mbandaka, who had developed symptoms including fever and headache, and died on 21 April (for more details, please see the Disease Outbreak News published on 28 April 2022).  

On 21 April, a blood sample from the index case, taken by the provincial laboratory in Mbandaka, tested positive for Ebola virus by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR); an oral swab analyzed on 22 April also tested positive for Ebola virus by RT-PCR. For confirmation, a blood sample and an oral swab were sent to the reference laboratory, the National Institute of Biomedical Research (INRB) in Kinshasa and tested positive for Ebola virus by RT-PCR. 

Four secondary cases, who had epidemiological links to the index case, were reported between 25 April and 19 May 2022. The last confirmed case was reported on 19 May. Of the five cases reported, four were males and one was a female, they were aged 9 to 48 years. 

Figure 1. Confirmed and probable cases of Ebola virus diseases in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, reported 23 April to 3 July 2022



A total of 1076 contacts were identified around the five EVD cases and followed up for 21 days. 

From 23 April to 2 July 2022, a total of 12 476 alerts were reported from eight health zones including 11 519 from Mbandaka city (Mbandaka, Wangata and Bolenge health zones), of which 12 214 (98%) were investigated and 1097 (9%) were validated as suspected cases of EVD. 

On 4 July 2022, the MoH declared the end of the outbreak, 42 days (twice the maximum incubation period) after the burial of the last confirmed case who died in the community. 

Public health response
Overall response: The MoH, together with WHO and other partners, initiated response measures to control the outbreak and prevent further spread. The MoH activated the national and district emergency management committees to coordinate the response. Multidisciplinary teams were deployed to the field to actively search and provide care for cases; identify, reach and follow-up contacts; and sensitize communities on outbreak prevention and control interventions. 

Points of Entry: As of 2 July, a total of 647 874 travelers registered at 16 points of entry and points of control, of which 606 090 agreed to be screened for EVD. Among those who were screened for EVD, 279 alerts were notified, of which 262 were investigated in less than 24 hours. Among the 262 alerts investigated, 134 were validated as suspect cases. These 134 suspected cases were subsequently tested, and none tested positive for EVD.  

Vaccination: Licensed Ervebo vaccines and matching injection devices were made available through two requests submitted and approved by the International Coordinating Group (ICG) on vaccine provision. Ring vaccination activities started on 27 April targeting contacts, contacts of contacts, and frontline workers. As of 3 July, 2104 persons in the affected health zones have been vaccinated against EVD, of which 1307 are frontline health workers.  

Laboratory: A total of 999 samples have been tested for EVD since the onset of the outbreak, including five positive samples collected from four cases. Since 15 April 2022, 2000 Gene Xpert cartridges were made available to the Democratic Republic of the Congo through the global Ebola Xpert stockpile. A total of 835 GeneXpert cartridges remain in stock across the country, with 527 available at the laboratory in Mbandaka City.  

Infection prevention and control: Infection prevention and control (IPC) interventions were implemented in health care facilities and the community to stop the spread of the disease. A total of 70 priority health care facilities were identified for assessment and supervision for improvement for IPC measures and dozens of community sites such as schools, churches and houses were decontaminated. Over 3000 health care workers were briefed on IPC measures and 60 triage centers were set up. 

Clinical management: For case management, one Ebola treatment center (ETC) was rehabilitated, and seven transit centers, facilities with the capacity to isolate and care for suspected EVD cases before referral to ETC if cases were confirmed, were constructed for the management of suspected and confirmed Ebola cases. Specific EVD monoclonal antibodies were made available to treat confirmed cases in Mbandaka. In addition, standard care guidelines were developed and disseminated to improve care in the affected areas. 

Operations support and Logistics: Although there is a need to further strengthen human resources for operations support and logistics (OSL) in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the country’s OSL team responded swiftly to the outbreak by sending a cargo airplane from Goma to Mbandaka with supplies for EVD and ultra-cold chain equipment during the onset of the outbreak. In addition, the team initiated procurement for IPC kits, and has been actively involved in the rehabilitation of the Emergency Operation Center (EOC) and the ETC, and building transit centers. WHO deployed logisticians to support response operations. 

The OSL team in the country organized the destruction of the used GeneXpert cartridges by rehabilitating the unique high-temperature incinerator in Equateur Province. The WHO standard Fleet Management System, including a Vehicle Tracking System on rented vehicles, was put in place for running the operation.  

Additional key activities: Other activities were undertaken on the ground, including psycho-social support, and risk communication and community engagement (RCCE) actions to boost contact tracing and vaccination activities. 

The response has faced challenges due to strike actions from local health workers and low adherence of some community members to public health measures.  Despite these challenges, public health response tools, including vaccines deployed in the early stage of the outbreak by the government with ICG approval and support from WHO and partners, may have helped to control the outbreak. Solving the strike and improving community adherence to public health measures remain critical and must be pursued. Efforts should be directed at learning from this response to improve response to future outbreaks of EVD. 

WHO risk assessment
The current outbreak of EVD in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is declared over, with no new cases reported for 42-days after the burial of the last confirmed case. This EVD outbreak was the third outbreak in four years in Equateur province.  

WHO has noted that the current resurgence is not unexpected given the fact that Ebola virus is enzootic, present in some animal populations in the country and in the region. This means that the risk of re-emergence through exposure to an animal host or from persistent virus in certain body fluids of survivors, cannot be excluded. 

Re-emergence of EVD is a major public health concern in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and there are still gaps in the country’s capacity to recover, to prepare for and respond to outbreaks. A confluence of environmental and socio-economic factors, including poverty, community mistrust, weak health systems, and political instability in some specific areas such as North Kivu and Equateur provinces may impact the timely detection and control of future EVD outbreaks. Moreover, the detection of outbreaks in recent years in the Democratic Republic of the Congo may also be explained by the strengthening of surveillance and detection capacity following successive outbreaks and the scaling up of the Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response (IDSR) strategy.  

WHO considers that ongoing challenges in terms of access and security, epidemiological surveillance, coupled with the emergence of COVID-19, as well as ongoing outbreaks, such as cholera and measles, might jeopardize the country’s ability to rapidly detect and respond to a new outbreak. 

WHO advice
WHO advises the following risk reduction measures as an effective way to reduce EVD transmission in humans: 

To reduce the risk of wildlife-to-human transmission from contact with infected fruit bats or non-human primates and the consumption of their raw meat, animals should be handled with gloves and other appropriate protective clothing. Animal products (blood and meat) should be thoroughly cooked before consumption. 

To reduce the risk of human-human transmission in community settings, regular hand hygiene should be encouraged in communities, including hand hygiene after visiting patients in hospital or after touching or coming into contact with any body fluids.  
To reduce the risk of possible transmission from virus persistent in some bodily fluids of EVD survivors, WHO recommends providing medical care, psychological support and biological testing (until two consecutive negative tests) through an EVD survivors care programme. WHO does not recommend isolation of male or female convalescent patients whose blood has been tested negative for Ebola virus. 
To reduce the risk of human-to-human transmission and amplification of outbreaks during health care, IPC practices should continue to be supported and strengthened in health facilities including: 
ongoing training of health care workers for early detection, isolation, and treatment of EVD cases as well as re-training on safe and dignified burials and the IPC ring approach

ensuring availability of IPC supplies and personal protective equipment (PPE) to manage patients and decontamination of the health care environment (and community settings according to the IPC Ring approach). 

conducting health facility assessments for adherence to IPC measures in preparedness for managing EVD patients [this includes water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH), waste management of PPE supplies, triage/screening capacity, etc.] and follow up on action plans for continuous strengthening and improvement of IPC in health facilities. 

To engage with communities to reinforce safe and dignified burial practices when an EVD outbreak is confirmed. 
To have a clear Logistics Exit Strategy at the end of each outbreak which will enable swift response during the next outbreak. 
To build and maintain capacities for logistic support in at-risk areas or countries. Building the capacity of national logisticians is essential. 
To keep and maintain an Ultra Cold Chain (UCC) capacity, ready to use in at-risk areas. Movement of UCC from place to place should be avoided due to high risk of damage during transportation. 
To preposition EVD supplies (PPE, IPC kits) in at-risk areas. 
Based on the current risk assessment and prior evidence on Ebola outbreaks, WHO advises against any restriction of travel and trade to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. 










Situation at a glance
This Disease Outbreak News on the multi-country monkeypox outbreak is an update to the previously published editions and provides an update on the epidemiological situation, further information on the use of therapeutics, as well as on the outcomes of the International Health Regulations (2005) Emergency Committee regarding the multi-country monkeypox outbreak held on 23 June. Since 1 January and as of 22 June 2022, 3413 laboratory confirmed cases and one death have been reported to WHO from 50 countries/territories in five WHO Regions.     Since the previous Disease Outbreak News of 17 June was published, 1310 new cases have been reported and eight new countries have reported cases.
Description of the situation

The majority of laboratory confirmed cases (2933/3413; 86%) were reported from the WHO European Region. Other regions reporting cases include: the African Region (73/3413, 2%), Region of the Americas (381/3413, 11%), Eastern Mediterranean Region (15/3413, <1%) and Western Pacific Region (11/3413, <1%).  One death was reported in Nigeria in the second quarter of 2022.  

The case count is expected to change as more information becomes available daily and data are verified under the International Health Regulations (2005) (IHR 2005) (Table 1).   

Figure 1. Geographic distribution of confirmed cases of monkeypox reported to or identified by WHO from official public sources, between 1 January and 22 June 2022, 17:00 CEST, (n=3413)



Table 1. Confirmed cases of monkeypox by WHO region and country from 1 January 2022 to 22 June 2022, 17:00 CEST 



Public health response
Overall response 
WHO continues to closely monitor the situation, and support international coordination and information sharing with Member States and partners. Clinical and public health incident response have been activated by Member States to coordinate comprehensive case finding, contact tracing, laboratory investigation, isolation, clinical management and implementation of infection and prevention and control measures. Genomic sequencing of viral deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) of the monkeypox virus found in the current outbreak is ongoing, where available; preliminary data from polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays indicate that the monkeypox virus genes detected belong to the West African clade.   

Vaccines 

WHO has strongly encouraged Member States to consider the context of the current multi-country outbreak of monkeypox and convene their national immunization technical advisory groups (NITAGs) to review the evidence and develop policy recommendations for the use of vaccines as relevant to the national context. All decisions around immunization with smallpox or monkeypox vaccines (pre-emptive or post-exposure) should be by shared clinical decision-making, based on a joint assessment of risks and benefits, between a health care provider and prospective vaccinee, on a case-by-case basis. Member States using vaccines against monkeypox are encouraged to do so within a framework of collaborative clinical studies using standardized design methods and data collection tools for clinical and outcome data to rapidly increase evidence generation, especially on vaccine effectiveness and safety. 

Therapeutics 
Tecorivimat is an antiviral drug with recent regulatory approval from the European Medicines Agency for orthopovirus-associated infections, including monkeypox, based on animal models and data for safety, pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics in humans. Therefore, it is expected that reliable and interpretable results on its safety and efficacy will soon become available. 

Outcomes of the Emergency Committee
The International Health Regulations (2005) Emergency Committee met on 23 June 2022 regarding the multi-country monkeypox outbreak to advise the WHO Director-General on whether it constituted a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC). The committee advised the WHO Director-General that the outbreak should not constitute a PHEIC at this stage, however, the Committee acknowledged the emergency nature of the event and that controlling the further spread of this outbreak requires intense response efforts. They advised that the event should be closely monitored and reviewed after a few weeks, when additional information about the current unknowns (e.g., incubation period, the role of sexual transmission, etc.) become available, to determine if significant changes have occurred that may warrant a reconsideration of their advice.  

The Committee advised the WHO Director-General that Member States should collaborate with each other and with WHO in providing the required assistance through bilateral, regional or multilateral channels, and should follow the guidance provided by WHO (see the list of documents at the bottom of the page). 

The Director-General accepted the advice of the Committee, adding in a statement that the situation requires collective attention and coordinated action now to stop the further spread, using public health measures including surveillance, contact-tracing, isolation and care of patients, and ensuring health tools like vaccines and treatments are available to at-risk populations and shared fairly.

WHO risk assessment
The overall risk is assessed as moderate at global level considering this is the first time that cases and clusters are reported concurrently in five WHO Regions. At the regional level, the risk is considered to be high in the European Region due to its report of a geographically widespread outbreak involving several newly-affected countries, as well as a somewhat atypical clinical presentation of cases. In other WHO Regions, the risk is considered moderate with consideration for epidemiological patterns, possible risk of importation of cases and capacities to detect cases and respond to the outbreak.  In newly-affected countries, this is the first time that cases have mainly, but not exclusively, been confirmed among men who have had recent sexual contact with a new or multiple male* partners.  

The unexpected appearance of monkeypox and the wide geographic spread of cases indicate that the monkeypox virus might have been circulating below levels detectable by the surveillance systems and sustained human-to-human transmission might have been undetected for a period of time. Routes of monkeypox virus transmission include human-to-human via direct contact with infectious skin or mucocutaneous lesions, respiratory droplets (and possibly short-range aerosols) or indirect contact from contaminated objects or materials, also described as fomite transmission. Vertical transmission (mother-to-child) has also been documented.  While it is known that close physical contact can lead to transmission, it is unclear whether sexual transmission via semen/vaginal fluids occurs, research is currently underway to understand this. In addition, the likelihood of sustained community transmission cannot be ruled out and the extent to which pre-symptomatic or asymptomatic infection may occur as the infectious period is unknown, as well as the further spread of monkeypox virus among persons with multiple sexual partners in interconnected networks and the likely role of mass gatherings.  

The clinical presentation of monkeypox cases associated with this outbreak has been atypical as compared to previously documented reports: many cases in newly-affected areas are not presenting with the classically described clinical picture for monkeypox (fever, swollen lymph nodes, followed by centrifugal rash).

Atypical features described include:

presentation of only a few or even just a single lesion
absence of skin lesions in some cases, with anal pain and bleeding
lesions in the genital or perineal/perianal area which do not spread further
lesions appearing at different (asynchronous) stages of development
the appearance of lesions before the onset of fever, malaise and other constitutional symptoms (absence of prodromal period).
The actual number of cases is likely to be underestimated, in part due to the lack of early clinical recognition of an infection previously known in only a handful of countries, and limited enhanced surveillance mechanisms in many countries for a disease previously ‘unknown’ to most health systems. Health care-associated infections cannot be ruled out (although unproven to date in the current outbreak). There is a potential for increased health impact with wider dissemination in vulnerable groups as the mortality was previously reported as higher among children and young adults, and immunocompromised individuals, including people living with uncontrolled HIV infection, are especially at risk of severe disease. 

The risk is also represented by the difficulties involved in widespread lack of availability of laboratory diagnostics, antivirals and vaccines and as well as in ensuring adequate biosafety and biosecurity in diagnostic, clinical and referral laboratories everywhere that cases have occurred. 

A large part of the population is vulnerable to monkeypox virus, as smallpox vaccination, which is expected to provide some protection against monkeypox has been discontinued since the 1980s. Only a relatively small number of military, frontline health professionals and laboratory workers have been vaccinated against smallpox in recent years. A third-generation vaccine MVA received authorization of use by the European Medicines Agency for smallpox. The authorization of use provided by Health Canada and the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) includes an indication for the prevention of monkeypox. An antiviral agent, tecovirimat, has been approved by the European Medicines Agency, Health Canada, and the United States FDA for the treatment of smallpox. It is also approved for use in the European Union for the treatment of monkeypox.

WHO advice
All countries should be on the alert for signals related to patients presenting with a rash that progresses in sequential stages – macules, papules, vesicles, pustules, scabs, at the same stage of development over all affected areas of the body – that may be associated with fever, enlarged lymph nodes, back pain, and muscle aches.

In addition, during this current outbreak, many individuals are presenting with atypical symptoms which includes a localized rash that may include as little as one lesion. The appearance of lesions may be asynchronous, and persons may have primarily or exclusively peri-genital and/or peri-anal distribution associated with local, painful swollen lymph nodes. Some patients may also present with sexually transmitted infections and should be tested and treated appropriately. These individuals may present to various community and health care settings including, but not limited to, primary and secondary care, fever clinics, sexual health services, infectious disease units, obstetrics and gynaecology, emergency departments, surgical specialties and dermatology clinics.  

Clinical management and Infection Prevention and Control (IPC) in health care and community settings 

Caring for patients with suspected or confirmed monkeypox requires early recognition through screening protocols adapted to local settings, prompt, isolation and rapid implementation of appropriate IPC measures (standard and transmission-based precautions, including the addition of respirator use for health workers caring for patients with suspected /or monkeypox, and an emphasis on safe handling of linen and management of the environment), testing to confirm diagnosis, symptomatic management of patients with mild or uncomplicated monkeypox and monitoring for and treatment of complications and life-threatening conditions such as progression of skin lesions, secondary bacterial infection of skin lesions, ocular lesions, and rarely, severe dehydration, severe pneumonia or sepsis. Patients with less severe monkeypox who isolate at home require careful assessment of the ability to safely isolate and maintain required IPC precautions in their home to prevent transmission to other household and community members. 

To enable reliable evaluations of interventions, randomized trials using CORE protocols are the preferable approach. Unless there are compelling reasons not to do so, every effort should be made to implement randomized trial designs. It is feasible to conduct placebo-controlled studies, especially in low-risk individuals. Harmonised data collection for safety and clinical outcomes using WHO's Global Clinical Platform for Monkeypox, would represent a desirable minimum dataset in the context of an outbreak, including the current event.

Precautions (isolation and IPC measures) should remain in place until lesions have crusted, scabs have fallen off and a fresh layer of skin has formed underneath.   

Laboratory testing and sample management  

Any individual meeting the definition for a suspected case should be offered testing. The decision to test should be based on both clinical and epidemiological factors, linked to an assessment of the likelihood of infection. Due to the range of conditions that cause skin rashes and because clinical presentation may more often be atypical in this outbreak, it can be challenging to differentiate monkeypox solely based on the clinical presentation. 

Risk communication and community engagement 

Communicating monkeypox-related risks and engaging at-risk and affected communities, community leaders, civil society organizations, and health care providers, including those at sexual health clinics, on prevention, detection and care, is essential for preventing further secondary cases and effective management of the current outbreak.

For further information on risk communication for contacts, suspected and confirmed cases, and individuals who develop symptoms suggestive of monkeypox, please see the Disease Outbreak News published 17 June 2022.

Anyone caring for a person infected with monkeypox should use appropriate personal protective measures. As a precaution, WHO suggests the use of condoms consistently during sexual activity (receptive and insertive oral/anal/vaginal) for 12 weeks post-recovery to reduce the potential transmission of monkeypox for which the risk is currently not known.  

Misinformation: The public is reminded that rumors and incorrect information continue to circulate on social media and other platforms regarding the current outbreak, and that it is important to check facts with credible sources such as WHO or national health authorities.

One Health  

Various wild mammals have been identified as susceptible to monkeypox virus in areas that have previously reported monkeypox. These include rope squirrels, tree squirrels, Gambian pouched rats, dormice, non-human primates, among others. Some species may have asymptomatic infection. Other species, such as monkeys and great apes, show skin rashes typical of those found in humans. Thus far, there is no documented evidence of domestic animals or livestock being affected by monkeypox virus. There is also no documented evidence of human-to-animal transmission of monkeypox. However, this remains a hypothetical risk. Therefore, appropriate measures should be taken, such as:

physical distancing between people infected with monkeypox and domestic pets
proper waste management to prevent the disease from being transmitted from infected humans to susceptible animals at home (including pets), in zoos and wildlife reserves, and to peri-domestic animals, especially rodents.  
residents and travellers to countries that have previously reported monkeypox should avoid contact with sick mammals such as rodents, marsupials, non-human primates (dead or alive) that could harbor monkeypox virus and should refrain from eating or handling wild game (bush meat).
International travel and points of entry  

Based on available information at this time, WHO does not recommend that States Parties adopt any measures that restrict international traffic for either incoming or outgoing travellers.  

Any individual feeling unwell, including having a fever with rash-like illness, or who is considered a suspected or confirmed case of monkeypox by jurisdictional health authorities, should avoid undertaking non-essential travel, including international, until declared as no longer constituting a public health risk.
Any individual who has developed a rash-like illness during travel or upon return should immediately report to a health professional, providing information about all recent travel, immunization history including whether they have received smallpox vaccine or other vaccines (e.g., measles-mumps-rubella, varicella zoster vaccine, to support making a diagnosis), and information on close contacts as per WHO interim guidance on surveillance, case investigation and contact tracing for monkeypox.
Public health officials should work with travel operators and public health counterparts in other locations to contact passengers and others who may have had contact with an infectious person while travelling. Health promotion and risk communication materials should be available at points of entry, including information on how to identify signs and symptoms consistent with monkeypox; on the precautionary measures recommended to prevent its spread; and on how to seek medical care at the place of destination when needed.  

WHO urges all Member States, health authorities at all levels, clinicians, health and social sector partners, and academic, research and commercial partners to respond quickly to contain local spread and, by extension, the multi-country outbreak of monkeypox. Rapid action must be taken before the virus can be allowed to establish itself as a human pathogen with efficient person-to-person transmission in areas that have previously reported monkeypox, as well as in newly affected areas.





Situation at a glance
As of 22 June 2022, 33 countries in five WHO Regions have reported 920 probable cases of severe acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology in children which fulfill the WHO case definition. Since the previous Disease Outbreak News published on 27 May 2022, 270 new probable cases have been reported to WHO, including from four new countries. This Disease Outbreak News includes updates on the epidemiology of the outbreak, the publication of the new interim guidance on laboratory testing, and the launch of the clinical case report form on the WHO Global Clinical Platform. The detection of severe acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology in children across five WHO Regions is unusual, and the severe clinical sequelae of some cases warrant detailed investigation.
Description of the situation
This outbreak was initially detected on 5 April 2022 when the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (the United Kingdom) notified WHO of ten cases of severe acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology in previously healthy young children aged under 10 years in the central belt of Scotland. 

As of 22 June 2022, 33 countries in five WHO Regions have reported 920 probable cases (Figure 1). These include new and retrospectively identified cases since 1 October 2021, which fit the WHO case definition as stated below. There are four additional countries that have reported cases which are pending classification and are not included in the cumulative probable case count. Of the probable cases, 45 (5%) children have required transplants, and 18 (2%) deaths have been reported to WHO.  

Half of the probable reported cases have been reported from the WHO European Region (20 countries reporting 460 cases), including 267 cases (29% of global cases) from the United Kingdom (Table 1, Figure 2). The second highest number of probable cases have been reported from the Region of the Americas (n=383, including 305 cases from the United States of America), followed by the Western Pacific Region (n=61), the South-East Asia Region (n=14) and Eastern Mediterranean Region (n=2). Seventeen countries are reporting more than five probable cases. The actual number of cases may be underestimated, in part due to the limited enhanced surveillance schemes in place. The case count is expected to change as more information and verified data become available.  

Figure 1. Distribution of probable cases of severe acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology in children by country, as of 22 June 2022 (n=920) 



Table 1. Distribution of reported probable cases of severe acute hepatitis of unknown aetiologyby WHO Region since 1 October 2021, as of 22 June 2022

WHO Region 

Probable cases 

Cases requiring liver transplants 

SARS-CoV-2 positive by PCR 

(number of positive cases)  

 

Adenovirus positive by PCR⸸ 

(number of positive cases)  

Adenovirus type 41 

(number of positive cases)  

Deaths 

Americas 

 383 

23 

11 

118 

14 

12 

Eastern Mediterranean 

2 

0 

Not available 

1  

Not available  

1 

Europe 

460 

22 

47 

203 

30  

1 

Southeast-Asia 

14 

0 

Not available 

Not available  

Not available  

4 

Western Pacific 

61 

0 

6 

5 

0  

0 

Cumulative* 

920 

45 

64 

327  

44  

18 

*The information included in this table contains data notified under IHR (2005), including from The European Surveillance System (TESSY) and official sources detected through event-based surveillance activities within the Public Health Intelligence process. Further information is presented in the Annex table. 

⸸ Adenovirus positive in any specimen type (respiratory, urine, stool, whole blood, serum, other, or unknown specimen type)  

Laboratory testing of cases 
Based on the working case definition for probable cases (Box 1), laboratory testing has excluded hepatitis A-E viruses in these children. Other pathogens were detected in a number of the cases, although the data reported to WHO are incomplete.  

Adenovirus continues to be the most frequently detected pathogen among cases with available data. In the European region, adenovirus was detected by PCR in 55% of cases (203/371) with available results (see Annex). Preliminary reports from the United States indicate that adenovirus was detected in 45% of cases (113/252) with available results.   

SARS-CoV-2 has been detected in a number of cases, however, data on serology results for are limited. In the European region, SARS-CoV-2 was detected by PCR in 15% of cases (47/307) with available results (see Annex). Preliminary reports from the United States indicate that SARS-CoV-2 was detected in 10% of cases (8/83) with available results.  

For further details, please refer to the EURO/ECDC Joint surveillance report, the USCDC Technical Report, UKHSA Case Update and the UKHSA Third Technical Briefing. 

Most reported cases did not appear to be epidemiologically linked; however, epidemiologically linked cases have been reported in Scotland, and the Netherlands. 

Box 1. WHO Working case definition of acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology



Epidemiological characteristics of cases 
Figure 2. Epidemiological curve of probable cases of severe acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology with available data, by week, by WHO region, as of 22 June 2022 (n=476)



Note: The figure only includes cases for which dates of symptom onset, hospitalization, or notification were reported to WHO (n= 476). The date of symptom onset was used when available (n=289). If unavailable, the week of hospitalization (n=163), or the week of notification (n=24), was used. 

As of 22 June 2022, of 422 cases with information on gender and age, 48% of cases are male (n=202), and the majority of cases (78%, n=327) are under 6 years of age (Figure 3). 

Figure 3. Age and gender distribution of reported probable cases of severe acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology with available data (n=422) 



Out of 100 probable cases with available clinical data, the most commonly reported symptoms were nausea or vomiting (54% of cases), jaundice (49% of cases), general weakness (45% of cases) and abdominal pain (45% of cases).  

Of all global cases, with available data, a total of 141 cases had both date of symptom onset and date of hospitalization available. Among these, the median number of days between date of symptom onset and date of hospitalization was four days [interquartile range (IQR) 7].  

Public health response
Epidemiological, clinical, laboratory, histopathological and toxicological investigations of the possible aetiology (or aetiologies) of the cases are underway by several national authorities, research networks, across different working groups in WHO and with partners. This includes detailed epidemiological investigations to identify common exposures, risk factors or links between cases. Additional investigations are also planned to ascertain where the number of detected cases are above expected baseline levels. 
WHO risk assessment
The risk at the global level is currently assessed as moderate considering the following factors:  

The aetiology of this severe acute hepatitis remains unknown and is being investigated;  

Limited epidemiological, laboratory, histopathological and clinical information are currently available to WHO;  

The actual number of cases and the geographical distribution may be underestimated, in part due to the limited enhanced surveillance schemes in place;  

The possible mode of transmission of the aetiologic agent(s) has not been determined; 

Although there are no available reports of healthcare-associated infections, human-to-human transmission cannot be ruled out as there have been a few reports of epidemiologically linked cases. 

WHO advice
Laboratory testing 
WHO has developed interim guidance for Member States on testing considerations and strategies for suspect cases of severe acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology in children. The guidance includes advice to support Member States with diagnostic prioritization and can be modified for regional considerations of endemic diseases. The guidance also considers assessments for other aetiological factors that are known to cause severe acute hepatitis in children, including other infectious agents, environmental exposures (toxins, medications), metabolic hereditary conditions, or autoimmune disorders, which should be considered in consultation with a paediatric hepatologist.  

Prioritization should be given to routine collection of various specimens from as early after symptom onset as possible, to allow for later testing as required and to identify aetiology(ies). If laboratory capacity is limited, storage and referral to regional or global laboratories should be considered for the suggested investigative diagnostics. Any positive specimens should also be stored for further testing and/or investigation.  

To further support Member States with laboratory testing, WHO is establishing a network of regional and global referral laboratories. 

For more information, please see the Interim guidance on Laboratory testing for severe acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology in children.  

Case reporting 
WHO strongly encourages Member States to report cases of severe acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology in children matching WHO’s case definition, through established IHR mechanisms. For more information, please see the Suggested minimum variables for reporting cases of severe acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology in children. 

Reporting clinical data through the WHO Global Clinical Platform 
WHO has developed a clinical Case Report Form (CRF) to facilitate reporting of anonymized case-based data. The analysis of standardized global clinical data will contribute to understanding the aetiology as well as clinical characterization of disease, its natural history and severity; aiming to guide the public health response and the development of clinical management guidance including approaches to investigations and infection prevention and control interventions.  WHO strongly encourages Member States’ participation in the WHO Global Clinical Platform for all cases meeting the WHO case definition, even if the CRF cannot be fully completed. Patient clinical data may be collected prospectively or retrospectively through examination and review of medical records.    

The clinical CRF can be accessed through the WHO Global Clinical Platform for severe acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology. 

Survey to estimate baseline incidence 
Baseline data on the incidence of severe acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology from countries outside of the European Region remain scarce. Although voluntary, WHO encourages Member States to participate in the global survey by making aggregated data from different hospitals/centers across all regions, covering the last five years. This survey will help estimate baseline incidence, and importantly where cases are occurring at higher-than-expected rates. 

Infection Prevention and Control 
Until more is known about the aetiology of these cases, WHO advises implementation of general infection prevention and control practices including: 

Performing frequent hand hygiene, using soap and water or an alcohol-based hand-gel 

Avoiding crowded spaces and maintain a distance from others 

Ensuring good ventilation when indoors 

Wearing a well-fitted mask covering your mouth and nose when appropriate 

Covering coughs and sneezes 

Using safe water for drinking 

Following the Five Keys to Safer Food: (1) keep clean; (2) separate raw and cooked; (3) cook thoroughly; (4) keep food at safe temperatures; and (5) use safe water and raw materials.

Regular cleaning of frequently touched surfaces  

Staying home when unwell and seeking medical attention 

Health facilities should adhere to standard precautions and implement contact and droplet precautions for suspected or probable cases. 

Annex table. Classification of reported probable cases of severe acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology by country since 1 October 2021, as of 22 June 2022 

Country 

Probable/epi-linked cases* 

(cumulative 920) 

Cases requiring liver transplants (cumulative 45) 

SARS-CoV-2 positive by PCR (cumulative 64) 

(n/Number of cases tested if known)# 

Adenovirus positive by PCR (cumulative 327) 

(n/number of cases tested if known)⸸ 

Adenovirus type 41 (cumulative 44) 

(n/Number of cases tested unknown) 

Argentina 

3 

1 

0 

2 

1 

Austria 

3 

0 

1 / 3 

0 / 3 

 

Belgium 

14 

0 

3 / 14 

2 / 7 

 

Brazil⸹ 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

Bulgaria 

1 

0 

0 / 1 

0 / 1 

 

Canada 

12 

2 

3 / 10 

2 / 10 

0/1 

Colombia⸹ 

2 

0 

0 

1 

0 

Cyprus 

2 

0 

0 /1 

1 / 2 

0/1 

Denmark 

7 

 

 

0 / 7 

 

France 

7 

0 

0 / 7 

4 / 6 

 

Greece 

11 

0 

0 / 8 

2 / 9 

 

Indonesia 

13 

0 

 

 

 

Ireland 

14 

2 

0 / 7 

8 / 13 

 

Israel 

5 

 

0 / 2 

 1 / 2 

 

Italy 

34 

1 

2 / 18 

10 / 23 

 

Japan 

58 

0 

5 

4 

0 

Latvia⸹ 

1 

0 

 

1 / 1 

 

Maldives 

1 

0 

 

 

 

Mexico 

58 

0 

 

 

 

Republic of Moldova 

1 

0 

0 / 1 

0 / 1 

 

Netherlands 

15 

3 

1 / 4 

5 / 10 

 

Norway 

5 

0 

2 / 5 

2 / 5 

2 

Occupied Palestinian Territories 

1 

0 

 

 

 

Panama 

1 

0 

 

 

 

Poland 

8 

0 

0 / 2 

2 / 5 

 

Portugal 

15 

0 

 

 

 

Qatar⸹ 

1 

 

 

1 

 

Serbia 

1 

1 awaiting 

0 / 1 

1 / 1 

 

Singapore 

3 

0 

1 

1 

0 

Spain 

39 

1 

3 / 29 

5 / 27 

1 

Sweden 

10 

2, including 1 awaiting 

1 / 7 

3 / 7 

 

United Kingdom (the) 

267 

12 

34/196 

156/241 

27 / 35 

United States of America 

305 

20 

 8/83 

113 / 252 

13 / 20 

Blank cells indicate where no data was available at the time of this report. 

*The information included in this table contains data notified under IHR (2005), including from The European Surveillance System (TESSY) and official sources detected through event-based surveillance activities within the Public Health Intelligence process. 

#All specimens with known test result (negative,or positive ) were included in the denominator. 

⸸ Adenovirus positive in any specimen type (respiratory, urine, stool, whole blood, serum, other, or unknown specimen type) / number of cases with adenovirus test result in any specimen type. Any specimens with known test result (negative or positive) were included in the denominator. 

⸹ Newly reported countries in this update 

Further information

Situation at a glance
On 15 May 2022, a case of wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) was reported in Mozambique through the Global Polio Laboratory Network (GPLN). Results of the genomic sequencing analysis indicate that the current WPV1 isolate is genetically linked to a strain detected in Pakistan in 2019 and similar to a case of WPV1 reported in Malawi in February 2022. As part of response measures following the confirmation of the case in Malawi, two rounds of bivalent oral poliovirus vaccine (bOPV) campaigns have been conducted in the country, with more than 4.5 million children vaccinated. The risk of international spread, particularly across the South East region of Africa remains high, due to persisting sub-optimal immunity and surveillance gaps, and large-scale population movements.
Description of the situation
On 15 May 2022, the GPLN reported the confirmation of a case of wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) in Mozambique. The case is a 12-year-old female with acute flaccid paralysis (AFP), with onset of paralysis on 25 March, from Changara district, Tête province bordering Zimbabwe and Malawi. Two stool specimens were collected for testing on 1 April and 2 April. On 14 May, the samples were confirmed to be WPV1 by National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) in South Africa. The child had previously received three doses of bivalent oral poliovirus vaccine(bOPV) but no inactivated poliovirus vaccine (IPV). Genomic sequencing analysis indicates that the newly confirmed case is linked to a strain that had been circulating in Pakistan in 2019, similar to a case of WPV1 reported in Malawi in February 2022 (For more details on this case, please see the Disease outbreak news published on 3 March 2022).  The last indigenous wild poliovirus case in Mozambique was reported in 1993.

Mozambique is also affected by a concurrent outbreak of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2), with seven cases reported in the country since 2021, the most recent on 25 March 2022.

 According to the WHO-UNICEF national immunization coverage estimate, the oral poliovirus vaccine third dose (OPV3) and inactivated poliovirus vaccine first dose (IPV1) coverage was 73% and 78% respectively in Mozambique in 2020.

 Figure: 1: Countries reporting cases of WPV1 and neighboring countries implementing preparedness plans



Epidemiology
Poliomyelitis (polio) is a highly infectious viral disease that largely affects children under five years of age. The virus is transmitted by person-to-person and spread mainly through the fecal-oral route or, less frequently, by a common vehicle (e.g., contaminated water or food) and multiplies in the intestine, from where it can invade the nervous system and cause paralysis. The virus is shed by infected people (usually children) through faeces, where it can spread quickly, especially in areas with poor hygiene and sanitation systems.

The incubation period is usually 7–10 days but can range from 4–35 days. Up to 90% of those infected are either asymptomatic or experience mild symptoms and the disease usually goes unrecognized. In mildly symptomatic cases, initial symptoms include fever, fatigue, headache, vomiting, stiffness in the neck, and pain in the limbs. These symptoms usually last for 2–10 days and most recovery is complete in almost all cases.  However, in the remaining 10% of cases, the virus causes paralysis, usually of the legs, which is most often permanent.  Paralysis can occur as rapidly as within a few hours of infection.  Of cases with paralysis, 5-10% die when their breathing muscles become immobilized.

Two of the three types of wild poliovirus have been eradicated (WPV2 and WPV3), with ongoing global efforts to eradicate WPV1. Currently, wild poliovirus is endemic in two countries: Pakistan and Afghanistan. The detection of WPV1 outside these two countries where the disease is endemic demonstrates the continuous risk of international spread of the disease until every corner of the world is free of WPV1.

There is no cure for polio; it can only be prevented by immunization.

Public health response
Mozambique has been actively participating in the multi-country emergency outbreak response implemented across the South East Africa region in response to the case of WPV1 reported in Malawi in February 2022, alongside Tanzania, Zambia, and Zimbabwe to reach more than 23 million children across the region.  Two rounds of bivalent OPV vaccination campaigns have already been implemented, the most recent at the end of April, with more than 4.5 million children vaccinated in Mozambique.  At the same time, the response in the country to the cVDPV2 outbreak is also ongoing. 

National and subnational authorities continue to be supported by partners of the Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI), notably by experts of the African Rapid Response Team, the GPLN, UNICEF and local organizations.  Surveillance across the sub-region continues to be strengthened.  
The detection of the current case underscores the need for a large-scale, rapid, multi-country emergency outbreak response across South East Africa, in line with revised international polio outbreak response SOPs.  The foremost priority is to continue to implement the sub-regional emergency response, by continuing to conduct large-scale, rapid and high-quality response campaigns.

WHO risk assessment
Detection of a case of WPV1 in Mozambique, and the second case in the South East region of Africa, confirms ongoing WPV1 transmissions in the sub-region. 

WHO considers that there is a continuous high risk of international spread of WPV1, particularly across the South East sub-region of Africa, due to persisting sub-optimal national immunity and surveillance gaps, and large-scale population movements. The risk is further increased due to the decreased immunization rate related to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. 

The risk of spread associated with the concurrent cVDPV2 outbreak is currently assessed as moderate due to historical and epidemiological evidence suggesting that WPVs have a significantly higher propensity for geographic spread than cVDPVs. However, a comprehensive outbreak response to both strains is urgently being implemented, as both strains have the capacity to cause paralytic disease in children.

WHO advice
It is important that all countries, in particular those with frequent travels and contacts with polio-affected countries and areas, strengthen surveillance for AFP cases and commence planned expansion of environmental surveillance in order to rapidly detect any new virus importation and to facilitate a rapid response. Countries, territories, and areas should also maintain uniformly high routine immunization coverage at the district level to minimize the consequences of any new virus introduction.

WHO International Travel and Health recommends that all travellers to polio-affected areas should be fully vaccinated against polio. Residents (and visitors for more than four weeks) from affected areas should receive an additional dose of OPV or IPV within four weeks to 12 months of travel.

As per the advice of an Emergency Committee convened under the International Health Regulations (2005), the risk of international spread of poliovirus remains a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC). Countries affected by poliovirus transmission are subject to Temporary Recommendations. To comply with the Temporary Recommendations issued under the PHEIC, any country infected by poliovirus should declare the outbreak as a national public health emergency, ensure the vaccination of residents and long-term visitors and restrict at the point of departure travel of individuals, who have not been vaccinated or cannot prove the vaccination status.

The latest epidemiological information on WPVs and cVDPVs is updated weekly on the GPEI website.

WHO does not recommend any restriction on travel and/or trade to Mozambique based on the information available for this current event.













